NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Benjamin Jones
Working Paper 34312
http://www.nber.org/papers/w34312

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2025

Ben Jones acknowledges research funding support from the National Science Foundation (award
number 2404035), and the Ryan Institute on Complexity at the Kellogg School of Management.
Jones also provides compensated consulting services to a U.S. research university. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2025 by Benjamin Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Artificial Intelligence in Research and Development
Benjamin Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 34312
October 2025
JEL No. O3
ABSTRACT
How much can AI accelerate progress in different research fields? This paper shows that three
features—the share of research tasks AI performs, the productivity of AI at those tasks, and the
strength of bottlenecks—are key determinants of AI’s implications in any area, from cancer
therapeutics to software design. The model maps changes in AI capabilities to research outcomes,
quantifies the “marginal returns to intelligence,” and shows how AI can shift returns to R&D
investment. Concepts like superintelligence, Powerful AI, and Transformative AI are further
engaged and disciplined. Finally, the framework sets a measurement agenda linking AI
benchmarks to field-specific opportunities for accelerating progress.

Benjamin Jones
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
and NBER
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu

“I believe that in the AI age, we should be talking about the marginal returns to
intelligence, and trying to figure out what the other factors are that are complementary to
intelligence and that become limiting factors when intelligence is very high. We are not
used to thinking in this way—to asking “how much does being smarter help with this
task, and on what timescale?” — but it seems like the right way to conceptualize a world
with very powerful AI.”
– Dario Amodei, CEO Anthropic (October 2024)

1

Introduction
Amidst advancing capabilities of artificial intelligence (AI), economists, technologists,

policymakers, and broader society are seeking to understand its manifold implications. In
economics, models suggest that substantial automation in the production of ordinary goods
and services can lead to large effects on both economic growth and inequality (e.g., Zeira
1998; Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018, 2020; Aghion et al. 2019, Jones and Liu 2024). But
beyond ordinary goods and services, it is now understood that AI can influence the “ideas
production function” - i.e., the research and development (R&D) process - and thereby
directly and perhaps sharply increase rates of progress for wide-ranging outcomes. Growth
models suggest that AI’s role in accelerating ideas production may drive especially powerful
dynamics for the economy (Aghion et al. 2019, Trammell and Korinek 2023) and some
observers expect accelerating advances for human health (King 2025, Zhou et al. 2025).
Meanwhile, AI tools are increasingly used in research - for prediction, discovery, literature
reviews, generating code, building datasets, writing and editing, and other tasks (Chen et
al. 2025). Domain-specific AIs appear potentially transformative in certain research fields,
like GNoME (Merchant et al. 2023) for material discovery or the Nobel-Prize winning
AlphaFold (Jumper et al. 2021) in structural biology.
This paper provides a framework to assess how AI may impact R&D. The centerpiece
is a model that, while simple, is broad in three senses. First, the model includes both
“machines” and “people” as inputs to R&D. By machines, we mean AI but also any kind
of research-related machines (microscopes, centrifuges, particle accelerators, etc.). To the

2

extent that the innovation literature has paid less attention to capital inputs to R&D (in
favor of studying human inputs to R&D), the model provides a framework for incorporating
machines in a fairly general manner. Second, the model allows machines to advance flexibly
both in (i) the range of tasks machines can perform and (ii) how good machines are at
various tasks. Related, while the model can be used to study modest advances in AI, it
also allows AI to become extraordinarily capable, providing closed-form solutions where AI
takes over large shares of tasks that were previously performed by research labor or where
AI supercedes human performance at specific research tasks by large multiples. Finally,
the model remains open to various R&D objectives: gains in productivity, health, national
security, or other dimensions. That is, rather than embed R&D into a general equilibrium
context where the outcomes are macroeconomic variables (as in models of economic growth),
this model will be open about the outcomes of interest and ask how to allocate a given R&D
budget to advance that outcome. For example, the outcome might be relatively narrow
(e.g., determine the structure of a protein, write a section of code), somewhat broader (e.g.,
produce a new drug for a specific cancer, or increase the productivity of a specific firm), or
very broad (e.g., increase overall longevity or economy-wide total factor productivity).
The model emphasizes three key features that will determine AI’s impact. These features
are: (a) the share of research tasks that AI can perform; (b) the productivity of AI at these
heterogeneous research tasks; and (c) the strength of bottlenecks in ideas production. The
model shows that these three features are essential for understanding whether AI will, or
will not, significantly accelerate progress on dimensions of interest - that taking a stand on
these three features is central to assessing what we may expect from AI in any research
area. These features also point to key empirical objects, defining a measurement agenda
that is critical to making any strong claims about AI in R&D. Importantly, while the
future capabilities of AI are uncertain, the conceptual framework clarifies simple empirical
constructs - including some available measures today - that can inform what we might
expect.
The model can also elucidate the “marginal return to intelligence,” to borrow an evocative phrase from Dario Amodei (Amodei 2024), who has wondered whether abundant, extremely intelligent AIs will massively or modestly advance rates of progress. The model
develops explicit results for assessing the R&D implications of computer servers full of

3

hyper-intelligent synthetic researchers or even superintelligence, which some technologists
and industry leaders suggest is close at hand. More generally, the model determines the
rate of progress per dollar spent on R&D, conditional on the research technologies available.
Thus we can see how advances in machine intelligence will change the relationship between
a unit of R&D investment and a unit of progress. By applying some value weight to the
progress, such as value-added output for a productivity gain or quality-adjusted-life-year
valuation to a health improvement, one can then calculate a rate of return.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 situates the modeling approach in relation
to existing literature. Section 3 presents the baseline model. Section 4 applies the model
to assess the implications of specific AI capabilities. Section 5 examines the potential
for Transformative AI. Section 6 discusses applications to specific research areas and the
relationship between the model and explicit AI benchmarks. Section 7 concludes.

2

Conceptual Approach and Prior Literature
This paper views R&D as a set of activities or “tasks.” These tasks can be understood

flexibly. They could be high-level steps familiar to science, such as defining a research
question, developing a conceptual framework and/or empirical approach, collecting and analyzing data, and writing up results. Or they could concern product development, involving
steps like design, prototyping, and testing. Research tasks could also be defined with increasing specificity. More specific steps will vary substantially depending on the field and
specific research question - from running difference-in-difference models in economics to using phosphoproteomics techniques in cancer biology.1 As such, we might apply the model,
and its key measures, differently to different types of research.
1

Procedures, techniques, and capital equipment vary greatly across fields. For example, a project in

economics using U.S. administrative data could involve: conceiving of a research question and its empirical
strategy, proposing the project and obtaining approval from U.S. Census, accessing a nearby Research Data
Center, learning data dictionaries and database structures, implementing empirical strategies by writing
code for statistical analysis, iteratively producing and assessing the main empirical findings and robustness
analyses, and completing the disclosure process. By contrast, in designing a cancer therapeutic, research steps
could include identifying an oncogenic mutation and determining relevant protein structure and function.
Beyond the protein’s “fold,” post-translational modifications via phosphorylation will inform protein activity,
including cancer-relevant roles in cellular processes. Experimental steps may utilize cryo-electron microscopy,
nuclear magnetic resonance relaxation, single-cell phosphoproteomics, and mass spectrometry. Subsequent

4

Taking a task-based view allows us to leverage recent advances in task-based models
(Zeira 1998; Autor et al. 2003; Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018; Aghion et al. 2019; Jones and
Liu 2024). The approach used here is closest to Jones and Liu (2024), which incorporates
the standard idea that machines can take over tasks previously performed by labor while
also allowing for machines to become especially good at these tasks - a feature that seems
essential for understanding potential gains from AI. This paper is distinct from most prior
task-oriented models in focusing on the ideas production function and in taking a micro
approach (as opposed to a general equilibrium, growth-oriented approach). Specifically,
we consider how a research team, laboratory, public research institution, or business can
maximize the rate of progress per dollar spent on R&D, taking factor prices as given.2
Other recent contributions have developed important insights into how AI can influence
R&D. Taking creativity perspectives, one view is that AI can improve upon exploratory
search into uncertain terrain (Gans 2025). Another view it that AI can better leverage
combinatoric possibilities (Agrawal et al. 2024). According to the related “burden of knowledge” viewpoint, individual researchers have increasingly narrow expertise, as one person
can know only a shrinking share of aggregate knowledge, the more humanity’s collective
knowledge accumulates (Jones 2009, Hill et al. 2025). The capacity of AI to aggregate
wide-ranging knowledge may thus be an essential advantage, allowing AI to overcome human creative limits. Tools like GNoME already suggest this AI potential for identifying
new materials (as combinations of molecules) or chemical synthesis pathways (as combinations of steps) that may be hard or costly for human researchers to see (Segler et al. 2018,
Merchant et al. 2023). This paper incorporates creative search in only a simple way by
focusing on “tasks,” which can embrace both creative search tasks and research execution
tasks. While some key insights can be lost by being broad in this way, the benefit is that
steps in drug design involve finding a compound that disrupts the oncogenic pathway with sufficient potency
and minimal side effects, tested across cells, animals, and humans, and using additional specialized methods.
2
To the extent that R&D is a very small share (on the order of 3%) of the overall economy, taking
capital and labor prices as given seems a reasonable place to start. To the extent that AI simultaneously,
substantially affects many sectors of the economy, one may further consider shifts in factor prices, in general
equilibrium settings. See Aghion et al. (2019) and Trammell and Korinek (2023). But also see the discussion
of “double bottlenecks”, which will further constrain AI’s aggregate potential, in Section 5. At root, if the
bottlenecks in this paper are sufficiently germane, then the partial equilibrium analysis is more fitting. If
the bottlenecks are overcome, then additional general equilibrium forces would come into play.

5

we can provide a more embracing view of research activities. One can then apply the model
at various levels of focus, where measures of tasks describe different aspects of the research
process. We will further discuss the nature of key research activities and their implications
for assessing AI’s potential in Section 5.

3

The Model
We consider R&D efforts that seek to advance some outcome. Let the outcome of

interest be measured as Zt . In an economic context, Zt could be productivity in a specific
production process, or perhaps productivity across an entire production chain in a given
sector. In a health context, Zt could be longevity in the face of a specific heart ailment, like
a cardiac arrhythmia, or perhaps longevity given heart disease as a whole. The type and
breadth of outcome measured by Zt is important for assessing AI’s potential impact, as we
will discuss later. But as a starting point, focusing on R&D activity, we can be generic:
there is a desire to improve some measure, Zt , which we do by applying inputs into research
and development activities.
To proceed, define the “idea production function” (the mapping between R&D inputs
and resulting improvement in Zt ) as:
Żt =

ζ Ztφ

hZ 1

rt (j)θ dj

i1/θ

,

θ<0

(1)

0

Here, there is a unit measure of research tasks, indexed by j ∈ [0, 1], and rt (j) is the output
at a given research task. The parameter θ governs the degree of complementarity between
tasks - i.e., the strength of “bottlenecks.” Finally, the rate of progress may depend on the
current state of Zt itself, as governed by the parameter φ, so that research advances might
become easier (φ > 0) or harder (φ < 0) as progress continues.
To introduce AI, we imagine that a given task may be performed either by machines or
humans. In particular, we imagine that humans can do all these tasks, but that machines
have been created over time that perform some fraction of these tasks. Moreover, machines
may greatly exceed human capacity at specific tasks. For instance, instruments such as
telescopes, microscopes, and thermometers can outperform human senses of observation,
while computers outstrip human cognition at floating-point arithmetic, regression modeling,
and information retention.

6

Task-level production is



mt (j) xt (j),
rt (j) =


H lt (j),

0 ≤ j < γt (machine tasks),
(2)
0 ≤ j ≤ 1 (human tasks).

where xt (j) is the quantity of capital applied to a given machine task and lt (j) is the
quantity of labor applied to a given human task. The measure γt is the share of tasks that
can currently be automated - i.e., the share that can be done by AI or other machines. This
measure allows us to study the implications of AI as it takes over more research tasks. The
terms mt (j) and H represent the productivity of machines and humans at specific tasks.
For simplicity, we let research labor have the same productivity at all tasks. Meanwhile,
machine inputs have task-specific productivities. These productivity parameters allow us to
study the implications of AI as it becomes better at research tasks and potentially greatly
exceeds human capacities at many tasks.
In addition to task productivities, we also have input costs. Research labor will have a
wage, wt . Capital inputs will have a cost, µt . These are measured relative to a numeraire
good, and where relevant we will take the numeraire good as GDP with a price of 1.
Finally, it will be helpful to define a machine-task productivity index, as follows.
# 1−θ
" Z
θ
γt
θ
1
mt (j) 1−θ dj
Mt =
γt 0

(3)

This index will prove a useful summary statistic for “how good AI is at the tasks it performs,” which will be central to several applications below. Note that this index is the
generalized mean function, so that Mt is an average of all the underlying machine productivities, mt (j), where the type of average depends on the parameter θ.3
In sum, we have a set up that can flexibly engage key technology features for understanding the potential impact of AI. These three features are:
• γt , informing the share of research tasks that AI may perform;
• Mt , informing how good AI is at these tasks;
• θ, informing the strength of bottlenecks.
3

The generalized mean is a function that takes various means from a list of numbers, where the type of

mean depends on the value of θ. These include the arithmetic (θ = 1), geometric (θ = 0), and harmonic
means (θ = −1) as well as the Leontief or min function (θ = −∞).

7

3.1

Optimization

We consider knowledge production given a fixed research budget. We assume that the
firm, research institution, or single laboratory seeks to maximize the rate of progress at
some outcome. Their choice problem is how to allocate research dollars, given capital and
labor prices, their budget, and the available set of technologies. Thus research institutions
or research teams can increasingly shift spending toward AI depending on how successfully
it evolves. If Zt is measured in the same scale as R&D expenditure (i.e., in dollars, say
by applying value-of-life or value-added output measures to Zt ), the optimization results
inform the average return per dollar spent on R&D, as well as the marginal return to an
additional R&D dollar and the effects of technological advance on these returns.

3.2

Technology Adoption Condition

Before turning to the broader problem of allocating capital and labor to research tasks,
we first consider a technology adoption condition at the individual task level. That is,
since research labor can do any task, for machines to actually be deployed to a task j, the
machine must be the cost effective option. From (2), we therefore require that the task
output per dollar spent on the machine (i.e., mt (j)/µt ) exceed the task output per dollar
spent on human labor (i.e., H/wt ), if the machine is to be used. We can then define, for a
specific task, the relative cost advantage of AI to a human as
ct (j) =

mt (j)wt
Hµt

(4)

where we only adopt AI for a given task when ct (j) ≥ 1. This also implies a minimum value
of mt (j), which is mmin
= Hµt /wt . Below this threshold, a machine approach is not worth
t
deploying - one would rather use labor instead. Therefore, in what follows, we assume that
automation technologies satisfy the following requirement.
Assumption 1 (Technology Adoption Condition) mt (j) ≥ Hµt /wt for all j ∈ [0, γt ].
We can further develop a related technology metric, which represents the relative cost
efficiency of machines over labor overall. This metric will appear repeatedly in our analysis
below. Specifically, define
Ct =

M t wt
Hµt

8

(5)

to represent a relative cost advantage of machines. The minimum value mmin
(j) in turn
t
implies a minimum value of the overall machine productivity index Mt . Namely, since Mt
is an average of the mt (j), it follows that Mt ≥ mmin
(j). Thus the minimum value of the
t
technology index is also Mtmin = mmin
= Hµt /wt , and therefore we have the following
t
necessary technology condition,
Ct ≥ 1

(6)

As we will see, in understanding AI’s implications for R&D, the model will focus our
attention on the share of research tasks it can perform, γt , and its average productivity, Mt ,
across these tasks. One can construct γt and Mt from the vector of underlying task-level
productivities and costs. We will consider such construction empirically in Section 5, when
linking the model with AI benchmarking studies.4

3.3

The Optimized Allocation Given R&D Expenditure

Now consider how research teams and institutes make use of research machines and
labor. Define the total R&D budget as Dt . The budget constraint is
Dt = µt Xtr + wt Lrt

(7)

where Xt is total research capital and Lt is total research labor. Solving the constrained
optimization problem leads to the following result.
Proposition 1 (Fixed Total R&D Expenditure) Maximizing the rate of progress in the
outcome Zt given the R&D budget constraint (7) and given capital and labor prices, leads
4

As an underlying technology process, one may imagine that the creation and implementation of AI

applications leads to an increase in γt and also shifts Mt by averaging in the new machine productivities.
See Jones and Liu (2024) for an endogenous technology process along these lines. A more parsimonious
approach might focus purely on the distribution of machine productivities, the mt (j), and how this evolves.
Namely, one can define an underlying distribution of machine productivities, Ft (m) across the entire unit
measure of research tasks. Thus machines exist in some sense for all tasks, but they may be very bad (e.g.,
m = 0) at many tasks and are not deployed. Then we view γt as an endogenous feature, which is the
measure of machine tasks for which the technology adoption condition holds, i.e., γt = 1 − Ft (mmin
). For
t
this paper, and the applications in mind, we’ll stay at a higher level of abstraction and focus on exogenous
evolutions of γt and Mt . See also the discussion by Bronwyn Hall.

9

to the growth rate

ζZtφ−1 Dt

Żt /Zt = 
γt



µt
Mt

 θ

θ−1

+ (1 − γt )

 θ
w
t

 θ−1
θ

(8)

θ−1

H

All heterogeneity in the machine-task productivities is summarized by the single index Mt .
Proof. See Appendix.
This shows that the growth rate of Zt initially increases linearly in total investment Dt .
Thus, this equation also provides the initial marginal return to an additional dollar of R&D
expenditure, where the outcome is measured as the rate of progress. We see directly the
rate of progress will increase with the composite productivity of AI at research tasks (Mt ).
The rate of progress also increases in the share of R&D tasks performed by machines (γt ).5
As outcomes of interest, and to help calibrate the exercises to follow, we can further
compute the research labor and machine expenditure shares.
Corollary 1 The labor share and capital share of R&D expenditure are
sL
t =

1
,
θ
γt
1+
Ct1−θ
1 − γt

sX
t =

1
θ
1 − γt θ−1
1+
Ct
γt

(9)

L
t wt
where Ct = M
Hµt . The expenditure shares sum to 1 and are bounded in ranges st ∈ [1−γt , 1]

and sX
t ∈ [0, γt ].
Proof. See Appendix.

4

AI Applications
With Proposition 1, we can now ask what will happen to the rate of progress as AI

advances, potentially by a lot. We first consider what happens when AI becomes much
more productive at a given set of R&D tasks. Will the rate of progress at outcome Zt
greatly increase? We then consider AI’s capacity to automate a larger share of research
tasks. We then examine both of these forces together.
5

To see this directly, rearrange Proposition 1 in terms of the index Ct and recall that Ct ≥ 1.

10

4.1

The Return to Machine Intelligence

We’ll start by analyzing machine intelligence - i.e., Mt , representing how good AI is at
a given set of tasks. Our thought experiment is that AI intelligence surges ahead. Perhaps
AI becomes very powerful at a given set of tasks. To what extent will the rate of progress
increase?
Our first result considers short-run gains from a small increase in machine intelligence.
By short run, we mean the instantaneous increase in the rate of progress holding the initial
level of the outcome fixed. The distinction between short-run and longer-run effects is
discussed in Section 4.4.
Corollary 2 (Small increase in machine intelligence) The short run elasticity of the rate
of progress to a small increase in machine intelligence is
d log Żt
= sX
t
d log Mt

(10)

where sX
t ≤ 1 is the machine expenditure share in R&D, as given in terms of exogenous
parameters in (9). This elasticity declines with greater machine intelligence (↑ Mt ) and
rises with a greater share of automated tasks (↑ γt ).
Proof. See Appendix.
Corollary 2 provides a simple answer to the question of “how will a small increase in
machine intelligence affect the rate of progress?” by pointing to a single observable measure:
the capital expenditure share. To get a sense of this measure, note that U.S. and OECD
sources report labor shares of R&D expenditure of around 2/3, which suggests that we
6
might take sX
t ≈ 1/3. That said, much of the non-labor expenditure includes structures

and material inputs, not simply “machines”, and a large portion of these non-labor R&D
inputs are not obviously amenable to being substituted for by AI. Thus, while we will often
use sX
t ≈ 1/3 in what follows, we will also consider the case where only a portion of these
non-labor inputs can be substituted with AI. In a companion discussion, Bronwyn Hall
further examines measures of expenditure shares and their implications.
One related interpretation of Corollary 2 is that machine intelligence has fundamentally
limited effects on the rate of progress. In particular, the elasticity of the rate of progress
6

See, for example, U.S. Census BRDIS data Table 25 (National Science Foundation (2019) and also

Besiroglu et al. 2024.

11

to machine intelligence can be no greater than 1 (i.e., sX
t can be no greater than 1 in any
eventuality). However, this “small changes” result also appears too optimistic, as it will
overstate the acceleration in progress from larger changes in machine intelligence, even in
the short run. This is because the elasticity falls as Mt rises. Our second result therefore
directly considers the immediate effects of a large change in Mt .
Specifically, let’s imagine that machine intelligence suddenly increases by a multiple λ,
so that Mt → λMt . This advance in AI can be arbitrarily large. We ask what multiple will
occur in the rate of progress.
Corollary 3 (Large increase in machine intelligence) Let machine intelligence increase by
a multiple λ. The rate of progress, Żt , will initially increase by a multiple
η = 1 − (1 − λ−b )sX
t

−1/b

(11)

where sX
t is the machine expenditure share in R&D, as given in terms of underlying techθ
. In the limit where Mt → ∞, the rate of progress
nology measures in (9), and b = θ−1
−1/b for θ < 0.
increases by a multiple η∞ = (1 − sX
t )

Proof. See Appendix.
These results help reveal the potential impact of extraordinarily smart machines using
straightforward measures. Figure 1 implements (11) given an initial expenditure share
(sX = 1/3) and various views of the bottleneck parameter, θ. We see that θ is powerful in
governing returns to machine intelligence. It sets a fundamental “speed limit” of sorts, per
the last result of the corollary. For example, consider θ = −1, so that progress depends on
the harmonic average of the task outputs. If the initial capital expenditure share is 1/3,
then an infinite increase in machine intelligence causes the rate of progress to increase by
a factor of 32

−2

= 2.25. That is, the rate of progress would a bit more than double with

infinite productivity across the entire current set of non-labor tasks.
The role of bottlenecks may be even stronger, however, as it would also operate among
the non-labor inputs. The above thought experiment imagines that Mt , the overall index of
machine productivity, increases by large multiples. But AI – machine-embodied intelligence
– is only one type of non-labor input or research machine. More generally, R&D uses a wide
range of machinery beyond computing power. These can be tools of observation, including

12

laboratory staples such as microscopes, centrifuges, and PCR machines, to extremely large
detectors such as space and land-based telescopes, particle accelerators, nuclear reactors,
and gravitational wave detectors. Buildings are also an important capital cost for R&D,
to hold laboratories and their machines. Given these other expenses, we might edit our
thought experiment to consider what happens when some fraction of current non-labor
tasks are those that can be performed by AI. Call this fraction ν. Bottlenecks then appear
additionally in mapping from large gains in intelligence to the overall machine productivity
index, Mt .
Corollary 4 (Large increase in machine intelligence for relevant sub-tasks) Let AI perform
a fraction ν of the non-labor tasks. Let the distribution of machine productivity initially be
the same for non-AI tasks and for AI tasks, and let the AI’s productivity at all AI tasks
increase by a multiple κ. The overall machine productivity index, Mt , will increase by a
multiple

−1/b
λν = νκ−b + (1 − ν)

(12)

θ
where b = θ−1
. In the case of infinite machine intelligence, this multiple limits to limκ→∞ λν =

(1 − ν)−1/b for θ < 0. The rate of progress, Żt , will increase by a multiple

−1/b
ην = 1 − ν(1 − κ−b )sX
t
which in the case of infinite machine intelligence limits to limκ→∞ ην = 1 − νsX
t

(13)
−1/b

for

θ < 0.
Consider again the example where θ = −1, so that progress depends on the harmonic
average of the task outputs. Let the initial non-labor expenditure share be 1/3 and let
AI perform 1/2 of these non-labor tasks. Then an infinite increase in machine intelligence
causes the rate of progress to increase by a factor of 65

−2

= 1.44. That is, taking economic

growth, this would say that the growth rate would increase by 44% with infinite productivity
across the set of AI tasks. This upward shift in the rate of progress is much smaller than
when infinite productivity advances occur for all non-labor inputs. In Corollary 3, we
are imagining labor tasks remain a substantial share of tasks and thus provide the key
constraints. In Corollary 4 the remaining bottleneck tasks are both labor and half of the
non-labor inputs (i.e, experimental machines like particle accelerators, telescopes, PCR
13

Figure 1: How Progress Accelerates with Large Multiples in Machine Intelligence. The “bottleneck”
parameter, θ, governs the returns to intelligence. Even with infinite intelligence, accelerations in
progress can be severely constrained.

machines; material inputs like electricity; structures, etc.). Intuitively, the greater share of
tasks that AI does not perform, the less effect it will have - and these constraints can be
evidently severe.

4.2

The Return to Machine Automation

Our next analysis considers progress in AI of a different form: taking over a greater
range of tasks from human researchers. We’ll consider (potentially large) increases in the
share of R&D tasks that AI can perform and ask what this will do to the rate of progress.
More formally, whereas the last section focused on increases in Mt (how good AI is at the
research tasks it performs), now we focus on increases in γt (what fraction of research tasks
AI will do).
Corollary 5 (Large increase in automation share) Let human researchers initially perform
a fraction 1 − γt of all R&D tasks. Let AI advance to take over more tasks, so that humans
now do a smaller fraction ρ(1 − γt ) of tasks, where ρ ∈ [0, 1]. To isolate the role of automation, hold machine productivity, Mt , fixed. The rate of progress will initially increase by a

14

Figure 2: AI as a Subset of Machine Tasks. Here we consider how the machine productivity index,
Mt , increases with large advances in AI (top panel) and what this means for the rate of progress
(bottom panel). The figure plots cases where 1/2 of all machine tasks become more productive by a
multiple κ. Even with κ → ∞, increases in overall machine productivity can be severely constrained,
resulting in relatively modest accelerations in the rate of progress.

15

multiple

−1/b
X
ψ = ρ + 1−ρ
s
t
γt

(14)

θ
where b = θ−1
and sX
t is the capital share of R&D expenditure as given in (9). This

multiple has a lower bound of 1 and an upper bound of ρ−1/b . In the limit where ρ → 0 and
AI machines take over all R&D tasks, the rate of progress will increase by a multiple

ψ∞ =

γt
sX
t

1/b
(15)

Proof. See Appendix.
As a simple example, take the cases where the initial machine share of R&D expenditure
is sX
t = 1/3. Let the initial share of machine tasks be γt = 1/2. Now let automation proceed
to an extreme degree, where ρ → 0, so that machines take over all tasks.7 Then the rate
2

of progress will increase by 23 = 2.25. Thus, fully automated R&D tasks would a bit more
than double the rate of progress.
To gain further intuition, recall that we must have sX
t ≤ γt (Corollary 1). The case
sX
t = γt occurs when machines aren’t very good at what they do; more precisely, when Mt
is at the lowest possible value that machines are still worth adopting. In this case, machines
are expensive and the machine expenditure share rises to its task share. Extending machines
with similar (low) productivity to all remaining research tasks and holding factor prices
constant, R&D expenditure would then shift fully to machines but there would no gain in
the rate of progress (ψ∞ = (1)1/b = 1). This helps us see that the advantage of further
automation relies critically on how good machines are at what they do. In practice, machines
need to be substantially cost effective compared to labor for there to be an advantage in their
use; this is equivalent to saying that the expenditure share on machines is low compared to
the share of tasks machines perform.

4.3

The Return to Machine Intelligence and Automation

Finally, we consider the case where an AI advances both in the range of tasks that it can
perform (γt ) and its productivity at those tasks (Mt ). Indeed, the above analyses suggest
7

Note that we are imagining the Mt remains at its initial condition; that is, the average machine advantage

for the newly automated tasks is the same as its existing advantage over labor in tasks machines currently
perform.

16

Figure 3: How Progress Accelerates with Large Increases in Machine Automation. Further automation can replace bottleneck labor tasks with more productive machine tasks, but the bottlenecks of
remaining labor tasks remain severe. Even a small remaining measure of labor tasks strongly limit
gains in the rate of progress, depending on θ.

17

that large increases in both machine productivity and automation shares are needed for AI
to create large accelerations in rates of progress.
Corollary 6 (Large increase in machine intelligence and automation share) Let machine
intelligence increase by a multiple λ. Further, let AI take over many more tasks, so humans
now do only a share ρ(1 − γt ) of tasks, where ρ ∈ [0, 1]. The rate of progress will initially
increase by a multiple


 −1/b
−b 1 − ρ(1 − γt ) X
X
ϑ= λ
st + ρ 1 − st
γt

(16)

where sX
t is the capital share of R&D expenditure as given in (9). In the limit of a
super-intelligence where Mt → ∞, the rate of progress increases by a multiple ϑ∞ =
−1/b
ρ 1 − sX
for θ < 0.
t
Proof. See Appendix.
Now it is possible, with sufficient advances on both the intelligence and automation
margins, for the rate of progress to greatly accelerate. Figure 4 presents examples where
the initial expenditure share is sX = 1/3, the initial share of machine tasks is γt = 1/2, and
there is substantial task complementarity, taking θ = −1. We consider multiples in the rate
of progress as a function of multiples of machine productivity, plotting separate curves for
different shares of task automation.
We see that the effect of extreme intelligence depends substantially on the breadth with
which it can be applied. For example, in the limit of infinite intelligence, the rate of progress
limits to ϑ = ( 32 ρ)−2 . Thus if, say, 90% of all current human research tasks are automated
and conducted by super-intelligence, then rates of progress could maximally increase by
225 times. If only 25% of all current human research tasks can be automated, then rates of
progress would maximally increase by only 4 times, per unit of R&D expenditure. These
upper bounds occur when AI is infinitely good at its tasks. To the extent that AI conducts
only a share of machine tasks (whereas telescopes, microscopes, centrifuges and other experimental machines remain an important component of the machine tasks), such multiples
via Mt would be further out of reach.
This is also where it is useful to apply the model in a field-specific way. For example,
in areas where cognition represents nearly all tasks (say, in pure math or software design),

18

Figure 4: How Progress Accelerates with Large Multiples in Both Machine Intelligence and Automation Shares. In a given research area, large advances in machine intelligence coupled with AI taking
over the majority of human research tasks create large increases in rates of progress.

then a super-intelligence can seemingly multiply progress enormously. But in areas where
experimentation is a large share of tasks (say, in drug development or particle physics),
then rates of progress may accelerate modestly despite super-intelligence. Assessing AI’s
implications will then be field-specific and assessments will depend on taking field-specific
stands on particular technology measures. It seems realistic that the relevant measures can
be estimated for specific fields, as discussed in Section 6.

4.4

Longer Run Gains

The analyses above focus on short-run increases in progress. We treat the outcome of
interest, Zt , as fixed at a point in time and ask how a surge in AI capabilities accelerates
progress initially. For longer-run progress, the key, further question is how rising Zt affects
ongoing gains, governed by the parameter φ (see (8)). If φ < 0, then higher Zt slows the rate
Żt . Longer-run gains from a burst in AI capabilities may then be smaller than short-run
ones, consistent with the “fishing out” of ideas in knowledge creation where the progress
gets innately harder the more progress we have made. If φ > 0, rising Zt boosts progress,

19

so long-run gains may exceed initial ones, consistent with progress acting to expand future
creative possibilities.
For some outcomes, progress is exponential, i.e., Żt /Zt is the key object.8 Examples
include Moore’s Law, Swanson’s Law, and progress in key economic outcomes like GDP
per capita. In these cases, long-run AI effects are dampened compared to short-run effects
so long as φ < 1 (see (8)). Evidence suggests φ < 1 for both macroeconomic growth and
Moore’s Law (e.g., Bloom et al. 2020). Thus, for such outcomes, a surge in AI capabilities
will likely have larger initial than longer-run effects.

5

The Potential for Transformative Artificial Intelligence
The above framework characterizes key forces that govern AI’s effects on R&D. For

“transformative artificial intelligence” (TAI), the model can further clarify what one must
believe for AI not simply to be impressive, but to radically transform outcomes. In this
section, we consider definitions of transformative AI and how the model can quantitatively
engage them.

5.1

Defining TAI

Transformative AI has various definitions. It orients on a large, step-function increase
in rates of economic growth. Karnofsky (2016) defined TAI as: “AI that precipitates a
transition comparable to (or more significant than) the agricultural or industrial revolution.”
That is, AI becomes TAI when it creates a break in human history of similar magnitude to
these prior revolutions.9
The industrial revolution led to an approximately 10-20 times increase in the growth
rate compared to pre-1700 history; TAI can thus be viewed as AI that will cause such
an acceleration again (see e.g., Davidson 2021; Trammell and Korinek 2023). To provide
8

The corollaries examine multiples of Żt , but since Zt is fixed, they equivalently describe the initial

multiple in the growth rate, Żt /Zt .
9
Note also a related, second definition from Karnofsky (2016) that is more specific to R&D. He further
describes TAI as “capable of fulfilling all the necessary functions of human scientists, unaided by humans, in
developing another technology (or set of technologies) that ultimately becomes widely credited with being the
most significant driver of a transition comparable to (or more significant than) the agricultural or industrial
revolution.” An interesting feature of the following analysis is to tie these definitions together quantitatively,
where a “step function” in rates of progress becomes tied to high shares of R&D automation.

20

1

𝜃

TAI

λ (log scale)

λ (log scale)

𝜃

1/2

TAI

Figure 5: From AI to Transformative AI. Here we consider how much AI must improve to create a
10-fold increase in the rate of progress. The y-axis considers multiples in the machine productivity
index. The x-axis considers multiples in automation, measured as the share of current human
research tasks that humans continue to do. We assume an initial capital expenditure share of 1/3
and that humans currently perform half of research tasks.

a quantitative target for analysis, and given these views, I will therefore define TAI as
achieving a factor of 10 increase in the rate of progress at an outcome variable Zt .10 The
discussion will further consider the implications of achieving a 10x acceleration in progress
for some outcomes but not others, especially when considering economy-wide trajectories.

5.2

Model Parameters and TAI

With this definition (or another per the reader’s choosing), we can ask what kinds of
capabilities AI must gain to become TAI. Specifically, consider equation (16). Further,
set ϑ = 10, representing an order of magnitude increase in the rate of progress. Given
the initial conditions, this acceleration can be achieved for various combinations of (1) the
share of human research tasks AI takes over (via ρ); (2) the average productivity multiple
AI achieves across the tasks it performs (via λ), and (3) the strength of bottlenecks (via θ).
Figure 5 presents two examples. We plot the combinations of the AI technology multiples
{λ, ρ} that would result in TAI for the given outcome Zt . The left panel assumes θ = −1
and the right panel considers weaker but still significant bottlenecks with θ = −1/2. The
10

This target was also suggested to me by the volume editors.

21

figure demarcates the boundary at which TAI is achieved, and shades the area for which
even more exceptional progress rates would be achieved.
We can make several observations. First, substantial automation is necessary for TAI.
For example, with θ = −1, AI needs to take over approximately 50% of human research tasks
before TAI becomes possible, regardless of how good AI is at the tasks it performs. Second,
beyond this threshold, further automation greatly reduces the need for super intelligent
machines in achieving TAI. For example, with θ = −1 , moving from ρ = 0.5 to ρ = 0.4
reduces the required machine productivity multiple from infinity to 100. Achieving ρ =
0.2 (where AI takes over 80% of human research tasks) reduces the machine productivity
multiple from 100 to 10. A simple conclusion here is that TAI will critically depend on
the share of human research tasks AI can replace. For TAI, we need substantial but not
complete automation of human research tasks.
In light of this, consider Dario Amodei (2024), who defines a related concept of “Powerful
AI.” He describes a “country of geniuses in a datacenter”, where there are millions of
instances of these synthetic geniuses running in parallel and at 10-100x human speed, and
wonders about the implications for progress. Note that while TAI is defined in terms of
AI outcomes, this concept of Powerful AI is based on the potential AI input. The model
shows how to link these concepts. In particular, with low values of θ, endless millions of
cheap geniuses (i.e. extraordinarily high λ) delivers TAI only if we reach certain automation
thresholds in research tasks. If, say, θ = −1, and more than half of human research tasks
cannot be done in silico, then Powerful AI does not produce TAI.

5.3

The Power of Bottlenecks

Clearly, bottlenecks matter, and they can defeat the power of genius. Strong bottlenecks
act to direct attention away from super-intelligence and towards the automation share because automation overcomes the remaining bottlenecks. The intuition comes from how
we take averages. In an arithmetic average (θ = 1), all inputs matter the same and there
are no bottlenecks. If some share of inputs become highly productive (say via cognitive
genius) then the productivity of the whole system is pulled strongly upwards. But for other
averaging procedures – those with lower θ – the smaller input values dominate. With the
geometric mean (θ = 0) or harmonic mean (θ = −1) we are “averaging down”. For example,

22

if θ ≤ 0 and some share of inputs is zero, then the whole system has zero productivity
regardless of how much we provide of the other inputs - i.e. we have strong bottlenecks.
Given the power of this force, what can we say in practice about the value of θ? A direct
way to estimate θ is from the production function itself. Namely, one observes variation
in task inputs and sees what happens to the output, allowing one to identify θ through
maximum likelihood or other estimation methods. An example of production function
estimation along these lines is Ahmadpoor and Jones (2019). They write down a R&D
production function like (1), observe variation in the inputs, and estimate θ. Analyzing
separately hundreds of different scientific and technological fields, they conclude that θ < 0
appears universally. For the median field, estimates suggest that θ ≈ −1.11
In some contexts, we may also have conceptual guidance on θ. For example, Amdahl’s
Law in computer science governs how the overall system speed relates to the underlying
parts. In Amdahl’s Law, the system speed combines the component speeds as a weighted
harmonic mean (i.e., θ = −1).
More general conceptual arguments may also help place bounds on θ in other fields.
One simple test is to ask how sensitive the outcome is to mistakes. In many contexts,
failure at any one critical sub-task leads to overall failure (Kremer 1993). In these cases, we
have θ ≤ 0.12 A second thought experiment is this: do progress rates explode when some
important research task is performed vastly better than before? If the answer is no, then
we have low θ, likely towards the harmonic mean.13
For example, consider that in some research contexts we have already experienced manyorder-of-magnitude improvements over human capabilities for important research tasks.
The most obvious example is floating point operations and their widespread use in key
research activities. Take economics, where regression analysis is an important activity. It
would take my entire lifetime to invert a single, big-data regression coefficient matrix by
11

That study varies the people inputs to identify θ, as opposed to the variation in machine capabilities,

but the same analytic principles apply.
12
Recall that, with θ ≤ 0, zero output on any sub-task means zero overall output.
13
Imagine two equally weighted inputs that both start with the value 1. Then the average is 1 regardless
of the type of average you take. Now let one input value explode by many orders of magnitude. With a
geometric mean, the output will rise without bound. With a harmonic mean the value of the output limits
to 2.

23

hand, which my computer does in a minute. But the rate of progress in understanding
economics has not improved in such a dramatic way. This strongly points at low θ, where
there are other bottlenecks to our understanding. Similarly, Bronwyn Hall’s discussion
examines how compute radically advanced key tasks in particle physics, but the share of
important research tasks performed by humans has remained high.14 Similar arguments
apply to many research tools, including telescopes, microscopes, and spectrometers, which
provide virtually infinite improvements over human senses of observation. Viewed within
the broader problem of drug design, the Nobel-Prize winning AlphaFold, which applies to
protein folding, is another example where radical productivity gains at a narrow set of
important tasks do not alone accelerate progress at the wider problem very much. All of
this reinforces the point above (and see Figure 5) that the automation share - how widely
AI can take over research tasks and thus overcome bottlenecks – is more critical for TAI
than massive productivity gains at smaller measures of tasks.
A final observation, especially with regard to TAI, is that bottlenecks are likely nested.
The fruit of each R&D process - solar cell efficiency, drug design, a new space vehicle - is a
particular Zt . When conceiving of 10x type acceleration in productivity growth overall, we
must consider how we combine the Zt for each area into an economy-wide productivity gain.
Baumol’s cost disease, and related estimates of production functions in macroeconomics,
point to further bottlenecks in the real economy - that the overall productivity gain will be
determined more heavily by the areas where Zt advances slowly than by where it advances
quickly (Baumol 1967, Aghion et al. 2019, Jones and Liu 2024).15 This “double bottleneck”
problem, which we could also call a “double averaging down” problem, may further challenge
the potential for TAI. It suggests that TAI will depend on overcoming bottlenecks not just
in a given R&D process, but in a large share of all research processes, as we will otherwise
average down a second time in the real economy. This also suggests that we need to pay
14

New tools may also call forth new human tasks, which can limit the overall share of research tasks

performed by the machines - see Hall’s discussion.
15
Health appears similar. We depend on many different organ systems, and the failure of any system can
result in poor health status or death. To greatly extend longevity and maintain a high quality of life, we
thus need to successfully overcome a wide variety of diseases – cancers, heart disease and stroke, dementia,
diabetes, chronic lung diseases – as well as other challenges like mental health in its many forms, sensory
loss, chronic pain, and an array of other health issues.

24

attention to how AI can affect a wide variety of different research processes. We turn to
this empirical agenda in Section 6.

5.4

TAI versus Economically Meaningful AI

The framework points to bottlenecks as a key challenge for AI to overcome. Should
bottlenecks remain substantial in key research areas, TAI becomes further from reach – or
possibly out of reach. On the other hand, TAI sets a high bar. Accelerations of progress
far short of TAI would still have profound effects. To the extent that 10x accelerations in
growth rates are difficult, much more modest accelerations - say 1.2x or 1.5x - may be much
more feasible and would, in the long-run, still have enormous implications.
Consider that, with 1.8% per annum total factor productivity growth, standards of
living were radically transformed since the Industrial Revolution, relying on a wide array of
technologies that people in 1870 would struggle even to imagine. If AI accelerated growth
to 2.6% per annum, the next 150 years would equate to 3 Industrial Revolutions in terms of
multiplying the standard of living - 50 times the standard of living today. History would say
that AI made a huge difference. We might therefore define “Economically Meaningful AI”
(or EAI) as an alternative scenario, characterizing such relatively modest but nonetheless
extremely impactful growth accelerations.

6

Specific Research Applications & AI Benchmarks
AI may have substantially different effects in different research areas – from pure mathe-

matics to material science to drug design. To estimate its effect for a given research context,
the model suggests that we focus attention on three key objects: {Ct , γt , θ}.16 This requires
articulating the set of tasks in a given research area, the performance of AI relative to
humans at the AI-relevant tasks, and the strength of the bottlenecks parameter in that
specific area. Here we discuss how to estimate each of these parameters. This is greatly
facilitated by the AI community’s focus on “benchmarking.”
16

The above discussion of TAI examined multiples of Ct and γt that would drive large accelerations in

rates of progress. Here we are focusing on estimating the underlying productivity and task share measures
themselves, from which any such multiples will ultimately be determined.

25

6.1

AI Benchmarking

Benchmarking is an essential tool for artificial intelligence. Different AI models are
ranked according to explicit performance benchmarks, and AI models are trained to succeed at these benchmarks. Examples include benchmarks for solving math questions (e.g.,
MATH Level 5), performing software engineering tasks (e.g., SWE-Lancer), undertaking
machine learning research (e.g., PaperBench), and very many others. The following discussion considers how benchmark studies may reveal key model measures.
Consider first the relationship between benchmarks and ct (j). Recall that ct (j) captures
the relevant cost efficiency of AI compared to humans at a particular task.
mt (j)/µt
H/wt

ct (j) =

(4)

For example, let’s say the task is to solve a specific type of math problem.17 One
could measure the machine’s productivity at the task as correct solutions per unit of time
(providing mt (j)) divided by the machine’s cost in dollars per unit of time (providing µt ).
Thus mt (j)/µt is correct solutions by the machine per unit of expenditure. Similarly, we
can calculate H/wt as solutions per dollar spent when using human labor. We can thus
calculate ct (j).
But this is only for one task (taken here as one particular type of math question). What
the model directs attention to is Ct , capturing the advantage of AI over a set of tasks.
Ct =

M t wt
Hµt

(5)

The difference is in how the task-specific productivities average together into an overall
machine productivity, Mt . And the appropriate averaging depends on the outcome measure,
Zt , of interest and its corresponding task set.
To continue the math example, math benchmarks typically report the percentage of
questions an AI gets right across a wide set of different types of questions. In that case
we are taking an arithmetic average (θ = 1) of correct answers. If the objective is to score
the highest grade on an exam, that is a reasonable benchmarking metric. However, in
17

For example, top AI models can now answer the MATH Level 5 questions, which are very difficult,

with high accuracy. See Epoch AI’s Benchmarking Hub for comparisons of top AI models on various math
benchmarks, including MATH Level 5, GPQA, and FrontierMath.

26

many R&D contexts – creating software, designing a rocket, engineering a new building
that won’t collapse – we are often highly sensitive to mistakes. Then we imagine θ is low,
and the appropriate benchmark should be calculated accordingly.18
For real-world R&D contexts, we therefore need to specify the relevant outcome and
its set of tasks and then, from that granular level, move to the key measures {Ct , γt , θ}.
AI researchers are now producing benchmarks that allow such analyses. One example is
PaperBench (Starace et al. 2025). In this benchmarking approach, the goal is to replicate 20
real-world machine learning papers. The authors encoded a scaffold of 8,316 individually
gradable tasks. The study further measures both AI and human success at replicating
specific tasks, as well as AI and human time to complete these tasks. By observing what
tasks the AI can do reliably and at lower cost (in practice, the top AI performer could
replicate 21% of the ML research tasks), we can assign γt as the share of replication tasks
that AI can take over and determine ct (j) for each of these tasks. Finally, conditional on θ,
we can calculate Ct . One could then compare how using an AI versus not using AI changes
the overall rate of progress (here, successful replication analyses) per dollar spent.
Finally, one can estimate θ. As discussed above, the direct way to estimate θ is from the
production function – by varying the task inputs and seeing what happens to the outcome
(e.g., Jones and Ahmadpoor 2019). With benchmarking studies, researchers could use
experimental variation to identify θ for specific contexts. This would start by defining the
benchmark (based on the specific R&D outcome of interest, Zt ) and the relevant task set. In
addition to measuring AI and human performance on each task, one could experimentally
vary the task inputs to estimate θ.
In sum, with suitably designed AI benchmarks, the model can be applied to specific
research areas. They key is to first define the research outcome of interest and the set of
tasks that are conducted in pursuit of the outcome. Then, measuring AI versus human
performance at the individual sub-tasks, calculating the share of tasks where AI has the
advantage, and using experimental variation to determine the bottleneck parameter, as
described above, can reveal the degree to which AI can accelerate progress. This seems like
18

In practice, with low θ, we will allocate tasks very carefully to those who can successfully perform them.

And we will naturally introduce verification tasks, which some mix of humans and AI may perform. Recent
advances in self-verification by an AI may then be critical for allowing AI to be used over a greater share of
tasks and to reduce the need for costly human verification.

27

a potentially useful way to design benchmarks in pursuit of deeper understanding of AI’s
true potential.

7

Conclusion
This paper presents a framework for assessing AI’s role in R&D. The model considers

the mapping between AI capabilities and resulting rates of progress. It focuses attention
on three key features: the share of research tasks AI performs; the average productivity
advantage of AI over humans at the AI-performed tasks; and the strength of bottlenecks.
The framework can be applied to any given research area, where the balance of forces
may be context-contingent. Concepts like Transformative AI, which imagines an order of
magnitude acceleration in growth rates, or Powerful AI, which imagines millions of geniuslevel AIs running in parallel, can also be assessed and quantified. The framework shows
that bottlenecks severely mute the effect of extremely productive AI. While much remains
to be learned, existing evidence and observations suggest that bottlenecks are common in
R&D (and in the real economy). This means that taking over a large share of research
tasks – which is how AI can overcome bottlenecks – is likely much more important than
radical improvements at a narrower set of tasks. Powerful AI is then unlikely to lead to
Transformative AI unless these synthetic geniuses can do most research tasks. Put another
way, the “marginal returns to intelligence” and even extreme intelligence appears strongly
limited when the intelligence operates on only a minority of tasks.
Estimates of the model’s measures will clarify what is possible in different research
areas. AI benchmarking studies can provide key information. The paper shows the specific
measures AI benchmarking studies can engage, pinning down the model and informing the
accelerations AI can achieve for various research outcomes. This is an important area for
future work.

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2018). “The Race between Man and Machine:
Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment,” American
Economic Review, 108 (6), 1488-1542.

28

[2] Acemoglu, Daron and Pascual Restrepo (2020). “Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US
Labor Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, vol 128(6), 2188-2244.
[3] Aghion Philippe, Benjamin F. Jones, Charles I. Jones. (2019). “Artificial Intelligence and
Economic Growth” in The Economics of Artificial Intelligence, Ajay Agrawal, Joshua
Gans, and Avi Goldfarb (eds.), Universiy of Chicago Press.
[4] Agrawal, Ajay, John McHale, and Alexander Oettl (2024). “Artificial Intelligence, Innovation, and Economic Growth,” Working Paper.
[5] Ahmadpoor, Mohammad and Benjamin F Jones (2019). Decoding team and individual impact in science and invention. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
116(28), 13885-13890.
[6] Amodei, Dario (2024). “Machines of Loving Grace: How AI Could Transform the
World for the Better,” https://www.darioamodei.com/essay/machines-of-loving-grace,
Accessed: June 5, 2025.
[7] Autor, David, Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane (2003). “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(4), 1297-1333.
[8] Baumol, William (1967). “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of
Urban Crisis,” The American Economic Review, 57(3), 415-426.
[9] Besiroglu, Tamay, Nicholas Emery-Xu, and Neil Thompson. (2024). “Economic impacts
of AI-augmented R&D,” Research Policy, 53 (7).
[10] Bloom, Nicholas, Jones, Charles I., Van Reenen, John, and Webb, Michael. (2020).
“Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?” American Economic Review, 110(4), 1104-1144.
[11] Chen, Q., Yang, M., Qin, L., Liu, J., Yan, Z., Guan, J., ... and Che, W. (2025).
“AI4Research: A Survey of Artificial Intelligence for Scientific Research,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.01903.
[12] Davidson, Tom (2021). “Could Advanced AI Drive Explosive Economic Growth?”
Open Philanthropy. https://www.openphilanthropy.org/research/could-advanced-aidrive-explosive-economic-growth/, Accessed: July 31, 2025.
29

[13] Gans, Joshua (2025). “Growth in AI Knowledge,” Working paper.
[14] Hill, Ryan, Yian Yin, Carolyn Stein, Xizhao Wang, Dashun Wang, and Benjamin F.
Jones (2025). “The Pivot Penalty in Research.” Nature, 1-8.
[15] Jones, Benjamin F. (2009). “The Burden of Knowledge and the Death of the Renaissance Man: Is innovation Getting Harder?” Review of Economic Studies, 76, 283–317.
[16] Jones, Benjamin F. and Xiaojie Liu (2024). “A Framework for Economic Growth with
Capital-Embodied Technical Change,” American Economic Review, 114(5), 1448–87.
[17] Jumper, John, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf
Ronneberger, Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool et al. (2021) “Highly accurate protein structure
prediction with AlphaFold.” Nature, 596(7873), 583-589.
[18] Karnofsky,
garding

Holden

(2016).

Advanced

Artificial

“Some

Background

Intelligence.”

Open

on

Our

Views

Philanthropy

ReBlog:

https://www.openphilanthropy.org/research/some-background-on-our-views-regardingadvanced-artificial-intelligence/, Accessed: July 31, 2025.
[19] King, Anthony, (2025). “Four Ways to Power-up AI for Drug Discovery,” Nature,doi:
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-025-00602-5.
[20] Merchant, A., Batzner, S., Schoenholz, S. S., Aykol, M., Cheon, G., and Cubuk, E. D.
(2023). “Scaling deep learning for materials discovery,” Nature, 624(7990), 80-85.
[21] Segler, M. H., Preuss, M., and Waller, M. P. (2018). “Planning chemical syntheses with
deep neural networks and symbolic AI,” Nature, 555(7698), 604-610.
[22] Starace, G., Jaffe, O., Sherburn, D., Aung, J., Chan, J. S., Maksin, L., ... and Patwardhan, T. (2025). ”PaperBench: Evaluating AI’s Ability to Replicate AI Research.”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.01848.
[23] Trammell, Philip and Anton Korinek (2023). “Economic Growth under Transformative
AI,” NBER Working Paper No. 31815.
[24] Zeira, Joseph (1998). “Workers, Machines, and Economic Growth,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Volume 113, Issue 4, November 1998, Pages 1091–1117
30

[25] Zhou, Hang-Yu, Yaling Li, Jiaying Li, Jing Meng, and Aiping Wu (2025). “Unleashing
the Potential of Artificial Intelligence in Infectious Diseases, National Science Review,
12(3).

31

Appendix
Proposition 1: The equilibrium rate of progress
Proof.
1. Set-up of the optimization problem
The idea production function is

Ż = ζZ φ

i1/θ
1
θ dj
r(j)
0

hR

as given by (1). Note that, for notational simplicity, we drop time subscripts here and
throughout this proof.
Given the task level production functions (2) and prices (the wage w and capital price
µ), the unit cost of producing one unit of task output is

c(j) =




µ/m(j),

j<γ

(machine task),



w/H,

j≥γ

(human task).

The budget constraint (7) can thus equivalently be written
Z 1
D=

c(j) r(j) dj.
0

The goal is to maximize the rate of progress, Ż, subject to the budget constraint and
the task specific costs.
2 The Lagrangian and the first-order conditions
Because ζZ φ is a positive multiplicative constant, maximizing Ż is equivalent to maximizing
R ≡

hR
1

θ
0 r(j) dj

i1/θ

.

We therefore solve the Lagrangian
max L =

{r(j)}

hR

r(j)θ dj

i1/θ



R
+ λ D − c(j)r(j) dj .

Taking the first order condition for any task, r(j), we have:
R1−θ r(j)θ−1 = λc(j)
32

which we can rearrange as:
1

1

r(j) = λ θ−1 c(j) θ−1 R.

(17)

3. Impose the budget constraint at the optimum r(j)
Plugging the r(j) into the budget constraint and simplifying we have:
Z 1
θ
R
c(j) θ−1 dj
D=
1
λ 1−θ 0
Define the cost index (a weighted mean of the task-level unit costs) as
Z 1
θ
c(j) θ−1 dj
J≡

(18)

(19)

0

4. Evaluate the objective function at the optimum r(j)
Plugging the r(j) into the objective function, R, and simplifying we have:
1

1 = λ θ−1 J 1/θ

(20)

It then follows from (18), (19), and (20) that λ = R/D and
R=

D
J (θ−1)/θ

.

(21)

5. Compute the cost index J
Split the integral into the machine and human parts:
Z γ
Z 1  θ
 θ
θ−1
µ
w θ−1
J=
dj +
dj
H
m(j)
0

γ

(22)

 Z γ

  θ
θ
θ
1
w θ−1
m(j) θ−1 dj + (1 − γ) H
.
= γ µ θ−1
γ 0
Now recall the definition of the machine-productivity index, M
h1 Z γ
i 1−θ
θ
θ
M=
m(j) 1−θ dj
γ 0
Substituting this above we then have:
J =γ

µ θ

θ−1

M

+ (1 − γ)

w θ

θ−1

H

.

Thus, all micro-level heterogeneity {m(j)} collapses to the single scalar M .
33

(23)

6. Optimal rate of progress
The rate of progress is Ż = ζZ φ R. Insert R from (21). Then plug in J from (23).
Divide by Z, and bring back the time subscript. We have
Żt
=h
Zt

ζ Ztφ−1 Dt
θ

θ


µt  θ−1
wt θ−1
+
(1
−
γ
)
γt M
t
H
t

i θ−1
θ

which is exactly equation (8) in Proposition 1.

Corollary 1: Capital and labor shares
Proof.
Total R&D expenditure is
Z 1
D=

c(j)r(j) dj
0

Note that we will suppress time subscripts for notational simplicity. The expenditure share
on capital inputs is then
s

X

1
=
D

Z γ
c(j)r(j) dj
0

For any input, given the first-order condition (17), we have
θ

1

c(j)r(j) = Rλ θ−1 c(j) θ−1
The unit cost for a capital input is given by c(j) = µ/m(j), and from the proof of
Proposition 1, λ = R/D. Using these expressions, we can rewrite the capital expenditure
share as:
s

X


=

R
D

 θ

θ−1

µ

θ
θ−1

Z γ

θ

m(j) 1−θ dj

(24)

0

Recalling the definition of the technology index, M (see (3)), we can thus rewrite the
above as:
s

X


=γ

µR
MD

 θ

θ−1

From Proposition 1, we have proved that:
   θ
 w  θ  1−θ
θ
R
µ θ−1
θ−1
= γ
+ (1 − γ)
D
M
H
34

(25)

Thus we can write the capital share in terms of exogenous parameters as:
 θ
1−θ
θ−1
   θ
θ  θ


µ θ−1
w θ−1
µ
X


γ
+ (1 − γ)
s =γ
M
M
H


Simplifying, and adding back the time subscripts, this is equivalently:
sX
t =
1+



1−γt
γt

1


Mt wt
Ht µt

 θ

θ−1

as was to be shown.
The labor share can easily be confirmed, noting that:
X
sL
t = 1 − st

Corollary 2: Small increase in machine intelligence
Proof.
Consider equation (8), the result of Proposition 1. Multiply both sides by Zt and take
logs. We have:

 θ−1
log Jt
log Żt = log ξZtϕ Dt −
θ

(26)

where we have used the definition of J from (23).
Now differentiate with respect to the technology index Mt . We seek the instantaneous
increase in the rate of progress, Żt , holding the initial level of the outcome, Zt , fixed. We
have:
∂ log Żt
1 − θ ∂ log Jt
=
∂ log Mt
θ ∂ log Mt
1−θ 1 θ
=
γ
θ Jt θ − 1



µt
Mt

 1 

θ−1
µt
∂Mt
− 2
Mt ∂ log Mt

Simplifying, we have:

35

(27)

(28)

1
∂ log Żt
= γ
∂ log Mt
Jt



µt
Mt

 θ

θ−1

(29)

Substituting back in for the definition of Jt and simplifying, we obtain:
"


 θ #−1
∂ log Żt
1 − γt
Mt wt θ−1
= 1+
∂ log Mt
γt
Ht µt

(30)

which we recognize from (9) as sX
t .

Corollary 3, Corollary 5, and Corollary 6:
Discrete Jumps in Machine Intelligence, Automation, or Both
Proof.
Corollaries 3, 5, and 6 are presented in the text in that order for expositional clarity.
Corollaries 3 and 5 can of course be nested within Corollary 6, so the following proof will
focus on the general case, Corollary 6, and then prove the others as special cases.
1. Start with the rate of progress and rewrite it in a cost share form
Specifically, write the equilibrium rate of progress, (8), in the form:

Ż =
γ 1/b

ξZ ϕ D



b 1/b
µ
1−γ
wM
1+ γ
M
µH

(31)

θ
and suppress time subscripts for simplicity. Noting from (9) that
where we define b = θ−1


1+

1−γ
γ



wM
µH

b
=

1
sX

(32)

where sX is the capital share of R&D expenditure, we can write the rate of progress as
M
Ż = ξZ D ·
µ
ϕ

2. Consider instantaneous shifts in M and γ

36

 X 1/b
s
γ

(33)

Specifically, we ask what happens when simultaneously (i) machine intelligence increases
by a multiple λ (i.e., M ′ = λM ) and (ii) the share of R&D tasks performed by labor declines
proportionally by a multiple ρ (i.e., 1 − γ ′ = ρ(1 − γ)). Define the resulting multiple in the
rate of progress as ϑ (i.e., Ż ′ = ϑŻ). Define the resulting multiple in the expenditure share
as κ (i.e., (sX )′ = κsX ). Using the rate of progress expression above, (33), and simplifying
ratios:
1/b

Ż ′
γ
ϑ=
=λ κ
1 − ρ(1 − γ)
Ż

(34)

Now recall that we can write the capital expenditure share as:
1

sX =
1+



1−γ
γ



(35)
Cb

where C = wM
µH . Thus, the ratio of expenditure shares becomes:

κ=

To simplify this, note that

(sX )′
sX



1−γ
γ





1−γ
γ



Cb

=
ρ(1−γ)
(λC)b
1 + 1−ρ(1−γ)
1+


(36)

X

C b = 1−s
. Then, with some manipulation, we can
sX

write:
1

κ=
sX + λb ·



ργ
1−ρ(1−γ)



(37)
(1 − sX )

Plugging this into the rate of progress equation and simplifying, we have:

−1/b


Ż ′
X
X
−b 1 − ρ(1 − γ)
ϑ=
s + ρ(1 − s )
= λ
γ
Ż

(38)

which was to be shown.
Taking the limit of infinite machine intelligence, and noting that b > 0 when θ < 0, we
have:
−1/b
Ż ′ 
= ρ(1 − sX )
λ→∞ Ż
lim

(39)

This proves Corollary 6.
3. Special Cases
For Corollary 3, we set ρ = 1. Simplifying (38), the multiple becomes:
−1/b
Ż ′  −b X
= λ s + 1 − sX
Ż
37

(40)

Taking the limit for large λ and noting b > 0, we obtain:
Ż ′
= (1 − sX )−1/b
λ→∞ Ż

(41)

lim

This proves Corollary 3.
For Corollary 5, we set λ = 1. Simplifying (38), the multiple becomes:
Ż ′
=
Ż



1 − ρ(1 − γ)
γ



X

X

−1/b

s + ρ(1 − s )



1 − ρ X −1/b
= ρ+
s
γ

(42)

(43)

Next, note that the multiple is decreasing in sX (since b > 0). Recall:
1

sX =
1+



1−γ
γ



(44)
Cb

and that sX ∈ [0, γ]. It follows by inspection that the lower bound of the multiple (when
sX = γ) is:


1 − ρ −1/b
ρ+
γ
=1
γ

(45)

And the upper bound of the multiple (when sX = 0) is:
ρ−1/b

(46)

Finally, taking the limit in (43) for small ρ, we directly find:
Ż ′
=
lim
ρ→0 Ż

 X −1/b
s
γ

This proves Corollary 5.

Corollary 4: Large increase in machine intelligence for a share of machine tasks
Proof.
1. The Change in Machine Intelligence

38

(47)

First focus on the multiple in overall machine productivity. Recall the definition:
 1−θ
 Z γ
θ
θ
1
M=
m(j) 1−θ dj
γ 0

(48)

which is the generalized mean of the machine productivities (and for simplicity we have
suppressed time subscripts).
Let’s assume that the distributions of the m(j) are initially the same for both AI-machine
tasks and other capital input tasks. Then we equivalently have the same generalized means
for these subsets of tasks,

M=

1
νγ

Z νγ
m(a)

θ
1−θ

 1−θ
θ
da
=

0

1
(1 − ν)γ

Z (1−ν)γ
m(b)

θ
1−θ

! 1−θ
θ

db

(49)

0

Now let’s have all the m(a) in the first set jump up by a multiple κ. The resulting
average for this set is κM . Averaging these increased productivities together with the
productivities at the other machine tasks, we have
M′ =

Z νγ

1
γ

[κm(a)]

θ
1−θ

Z (1−ν)γ
da +

0

m(b)

θ
1−θ

!! 1−θ
θ

db

0

This is equivalently

 1−θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
M ′ = νκ 1−θ M 1−θ + (1 − ν)M 1−θ

(50)

or,
λν =

 1−θ
θ
M ′  1−θ
θ
= νκ
+ (1 − ν)
M

(51)

as was to be shown.
If κ → ∞, then we have:
lim

κ→∞



νκ

θ
1−θ

 1−θ
1−θ
θ
+ (1 − ν)
= (1 − ν) θ

(52)

θ
where we note that 1−θ
< 0, as was to be shown.

2. Implication for the Rate of Progress
From Corollary 3, we know that a given multiple, λ, in the machine productivity index
Mt , causes the rate of progress to go up according to:
 θ
 1−θ
θ
η = λ 1−θ sX + 1 − sX

39

(53)

The relevant multiple in machine intelligence is now λν as given in (51). We therefore have:
η=



νκ

θ
1−θ

 1−θ
 1−θ · θ
θ
θ
1−θ X
+ (1 − ν)
s + 1 − sX
(54)



θ

= νκ 1−θ sX + 1 − νsX

 1−θ
θ

as was to be shown.
θ
Taking the limit as κ → ∞, and noting that 1−θ
< 0 for θ < 0, we see directly that
1−θ

lim η = (1 − νsX ) θ

κ→∞

as was to be shown.

40

(55)
