NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC GROWTH UNDER TRANSFORMATIVE AI
Philip Trammell
Anton Korinek
Working Paper 31815
http://www.nber.org/papers/w31815

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2023, Revised April 2026

We thank Tim Blomfield, Nicholas Emery-Xu, and Don Suh for research assistance. Korinek
performed part of this work while he was a Visiting Fellow at the Brookings Institution. The views
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of the Brookings Institution or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Korinek also acknowledges support from the Darden
School of Business at the University of Virginia.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2023 by Philip Trammell and Anton Korinek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Economic Growth under Transformative AI
Philip Trammell and Anton Korinek
NBER Working Paper No. 31815
October 2023, Revised April 2026
JEL No. E2, O3, O4
ABSTRACT
Recent advances in AI may herald the near arrival of systems that can automate essentially all work.
We review the macroeconomic implications of this scenario, in a framework synthesizing several
strands of the relevant literature. Robustly, fully automating production alone (so that machines can
self-replicate) would dramatically raise the growth rate and lower the labor share, breaking the
Kaldor Facts that have long characterized frontier growth. Automating R&D (so that machines can
self-improve) would accelerate the transformation, but may not produce it in isolation. Wages—the
product of exploding output and a plummeting labor share—may rise or fall, depending on the
returns to scale, the importance of natural resources, and the direction of technical change.

Philip Trammell
Stanford University
trammell@stanford.edu
Anton Korinek
University of Virginia
Department of Economics and EconTAI
and NBER
akorinek@virginia.edu

1

1

Introduction

Recent advances in artificial intelligence have raised the possibility of an economic
transformation as profound as the Industrial Revolution. AI models have demonstrated rapidly expanding capabilities in cognitive tasks, from natural language processing to scientific discovery, with slower but ongoing progress in robotics extending
these capabilities to physical labor. The 2024 Nobel Prize in Chemistry awarded to AI
pioneer Demis Hassabis for an AI system that can predict protein folding exemplifies
how AI is already accelerating scientific research. Future models may reach the level
of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI)—the ability to perform all cognitive tasks at
least as well as skilled humans—and in the process, unlike any technology yet developed, could fully automate the process of research and development itself, including
the creation of better AI systems.
If AI capabilities approach this threshold, the resulting economic transformation
could break the stylized facts that have characterized industrial growth for more than
two centuries. Since Kaldor (1957) first identified them, two empirical regularities have
served as cornerstones of growth theory: an approximately constant long-run growth
rate in output per capita, and an approximately constant labor share of output. These
“Kaldor Facts” have proven remarkably robust across industrialized countries and subsequent decades, shaping much of modern growth theory: see e.g. Acemoglu (2009)
for an overview. Yet when viewed over longer time horizons, the phenomenon of constant exponential growth appears as a recent historical anomaly. The global economic
growth rate unambiguously accelerated with the onset of the Industrial Revolution;
we have no reason to insist that it cannot accelerate again.
This paper evaluates the channels through which sufficient advances in AI may affect economic growth by synthesizing several strands of the literature within a common framework. We examine two fundamental questions: Under what conditions
would AI break the regime of constant exponential growth that has characterized the
industrial era? And what would be the implications for factor shares and wages? We
distinguish between the automation of production and the automation of research and
development and explore their individual and combined effects.
Our analysis reveals several robust findings. First, if AI enables capital to become
a gross substitute for labor in production alone, allowing machines to self-replicate,
the growth rate would dramatically accelerate and the labor share would plummet

2
toward zero, decisively breaking both Kaldor Facts. The magnitude of this acceleration depends critically on the degree of substitutability and the role of fixed factors
like natural resources. Second, automating R&D in isolation has more ambiguous effects: it may accelerate growth if automated research proves highly parallelizable, but
it could also leave growth rates bounded if fundamental constraints on the research
process persist. Third, the impact on wages is deeply uncertain, depending on the returns to scale, the importance of natural resources, and most critically, the direction
of technical change.
In recent years, economists have begun to engage earnestly in theoretical explorations of these transformative possibilities.1 We aim to synthesize the findings of
the most influential papers on the topic, covering both the insights of different categories of models and the underlying mathematical intuition. We have simplified some
models and adopted common notation to crystallize the mechanisms at work within a
unified framework. While we do not offer assessments of the probability of particular
scenarios, our analysis clarifies the economic conditions under which AI could trigger
a transformation as great as the Industrial Revolution or greater.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 examines the implications of automating production, showing how increased substitutability between
capital and labor could drive explosive growth and a vanishing labor share. Section
3 analyzes the automation of R&D, exploring conditions under which it could sustain
or accelerate growth. Section 4 considers the combined effects of automating both
sectors. Section 5 summarizes. Section 6 concludes with discussions of the transition from current AI capabilities to transformative automation, policy implications
for managing radical inequality, and the existential risks that may accompany economically transformative AI.

2

Automating production

Consider the standard constant returns to scale (CRS), two-factor production function
in capital 𝐾 and labor 𝐿, with factor-augmenting technology terms 𝐴 and 𝐵. Fixing
1 Sandberg (2013) presented an “overview of models of technological singularity” over a decade ago,

before mainstream economists started to analyze the transformative potential of AI. Most of the models
he summarizes therefore do not attempt to spell out how AI or other transformative technologies would
fit into standard economic models to produce the results in question. Our review fills this gap.

3
̄
labor supply at 𝐿,
𝑌𝑡 = 𝑌 (𝐴𝑡 𝐾𝑡 , 𝐵𝑡 ̄𝐿).
Today, labor and capital are at least weakly gross complements: their elasticity of
substitution 𝜀 is not greater than one, or equivalently, their substitution parameter
𝜌 ≡ 𝜀−1
𝜀 ≤ 0 (Gechert et al., 2022). While this remains, sustained growth requires
not only accumulating (effective) capital but developing labor-augmenting technology, as the developed world has done since the Industrial Revolution at a rate of ∼2%
per year.2 Because capital accumulates with output whereas labor does not, and output is bottlenecked by the scarcer factor, labor-augmenting technology tends to be
the more profitable kind to develop (Acemoglu, 2003). If all technology growth is
labor-augmenting and the saving rate is constant, the effective capital stock grows
with output. CRS ensures that 𝑌 , 𝐴𝐾 , and 𝐵𝐿̄ all grow at the same rate, and that the
[competitive] labor share does not change (Uzawa, 1961).
Regardless of the microfoundation, therefore, the central question is whether and
when AI will allow capital to become a close enough substitute for labor to drive
growth on its own. We call such AI transformative AI, or TAI. Under almost any standard assumptions, what follows is a radical acceleration to growth and decline in the
labor share.

2.1

Growth and labor share

The implications of gross substitution for output and factor shares are most straightforwardly illustrated by the extreme case of perfect substitution:
𝑌𝑡 = 𝐴𝑡 𝐾𝑡 + 𝐵𝑡 ̄𝐿.
𝐴 now has a simple interpretation: how many machines a machine can build per year.
Even fixing 𝐴, capital accumulation drives exponential output growth. Unless the
saving rate is negligible or 𝐴 is very low, so that capital replicates slowly, output grows
2 In broad strokes. Jones (2022) attributes 1.3% of the US’s long-run 2% growth in output per person

to labor-augmenting technology growth, and most of the rest to growth in human capital.

4
rapidly with 𝐴𝐾 and the labor share
𝐵𝐿̄
𝐴𝐾 + 𝐵𝐿̄
falls to zero.3
Furthermore, there are now strong incentives to develop capital-augmenting technology. Indeed, because capital is ultimately more plentiful and is no longer bottlenecked by labor, it is typically efficient only to develop capital-augmenting technology,
if both kinds are equally costly (again, see Acemoglu (2003)). If 𝐴 grows, output grows
superexponentially: the robots double their numbers in year one, triple their numbers
in year two, and so on. The labor share falls to zero even more rapidly.
Saving. By no-arbitrage, the interest rate has to equal the return on capital, 𝐴. As
the interest rate rises, the saving rate may rise or fall. The rise of automation may also
move the saving rate by shifting income from low to high savers or vice-versa: Berg et
al. (2018) emphasize that those who make most of their incomes from wages currently
empirically exhibit lower saving rates than those who make most of their incomes
from capital. Sachs and Kotlikoff (2012), Sachs et al. (2015), and Benzell and Ye (2024)
focus on the case in which retirees with high discount rates hold most capital.
Given any constant (or bounded) inverse elasticity of intertemporal substitution
𝜂, however, the saving rate cannot fall quickly enough to defuse superexponential
growth. This follows from an investor’s Euler equation. Letting 𝛿 denote the discount
rate, 𝑐𝑡 denote consumption per person at 𝑡, and 𝑅𝑡 denote the cumulative interest
factor earned by investing from 0 to 𝑡,
−𝜂

−𝛿 𝑡

−𝜂

𝑐0 = 𝑒 −𝛿𝑡 𝑅𝑡 𝑐𝑡

⟹

1

𝑐𝑡 /𝑐0 = 𝑒 𝜂 𝑅𝑡𝜂 .

Observe that, with constant 𝑔𝐴 > 0,
𝑡

𝐴0 𝑔 𝑡
(𝑒 𝐴 −1)

𝑅𝑡 = 𝑒 ∫0 𝐴𝜏 𝑑𝜏 = 𝑒 𝑔𝐴

.

Since 𝑅𝑡 grows double-exponentially, so does 𝑐𝑡 /𝑐0 . This is defused only if the elastic3 This pair of points has been made in many contexts. See Prettner (2019) for an especially straight-

forward treatment.

5
ity of intertemporal substitution ultimately falls as consumption rises, with 𝜂(𝑐) → ∞
sufficiently quickly.
Gross substitution in capital goods, Cobb-Douglas in consumption. We have
implicitly assumed that the production functions for capital and consumption are the
same: i.e. that there is no “investment-specific technical change”. In this case, capitaldriven growth requires gross substitution in production across the board, and any
acceleration to growth is coupled with a decline in the labor share, as we have seen.
This coupling is quite robust, for reasons Berg et al. (2018) elaborate, but it is not
strictly necessary. This is because rapid growth can be driven by self-replicating capital, as Mookherjee and Ray (2022) emphasize, even if the capital is not quite a gross
substitute for labor in the consumption goods sector.
Suppose that capital comes to be a gross substitute for labor in the production of
capital goods: e.g., for simplicity, that
𝐾̇ = 𝑠𝐴𝐾 − 𝑑𝐾 ,
where 𝑠 and 𝑑 are the saving and depreciation rates and 𝐴 is high enough to sustain
rapid growth (𝑠𝐴 − 𝑑 ≫ 0). If capital and labor are also gross substitutes in the production of consumption goods, the labor share falls as capital accumulates, as noted
above; if they are gross complements, consumption growth remains bottlenecked by
labor-augmenting technology. However, in the edge-case in which the production of
consumption goods takes the Cobb-Douglas form
𝐶 = ((1 − 𝑠)𝐾 )𝛼 𝐿̄ 1−𝛼 ,
the labor share (in the consumption sector) is constant at 1 − 𝛼, even as consumption
grows at rate 𝛼𝑔𝐾 = 𝛼(𝑠𝐴−𝑑): so, exponentially if 𝐴 is fixed and superexponentially if
𝐴 rises. Because capital here does not face diminishing returns to its own replication,
the proportional capital depreciation process does not force the capital stock to a finite
steady state in the absence of technological development.
Rapid, capital-driven growth alongside a positive-bounded labor share is thus a
technical possibility. This scenario might even be considered a limiting case of the
tendency over recent decades for manufacturing to grow more capital-intensive while
demand for labor in consumption services remains high (Autor and Dorn, 2013). Nev-

6
ertheless, because it relies heavily on the Cobb-Douglas edge case, we will put it aside
going forward, focusing on the case that machines capable of driving rapid growth are
gross substitutes for labor in general, and thus drive the labor share to zero.

2.2

Wages

The impact of TAI on the wage bill is more deeply ambiguous.
Rising wages given capital-augmenting technology.
function

Under a CES production

𝑌𝑡 = (𝑎(𝐴𝐾 )𝜌 + (1 − 𝑎)(𝐵𝐿)𝜌 )

1/𝜌

1−𝜌 𝜌
𝐵𝑡 (1 − 𝑎)𝐿̄ 𝜌−1 ,

⟹ 𝑑𝑌𝑡 /𝑑𝐿𝑡 = 𝑌𝑡

wages stagnate, or grow at their original slow rate 𝑔𝐵 , only under perfect substitution
(𝜌 = 1). Under gross but imperfect substitution (𝜌 ∈ (0, 1)), as Nordhaus (2021) notes,
wages rise rapidly with output even fixing 𝐵. Capital grows immensely plentiful and
complements labor, however slightly.
More generally, in any 2 CRS production function 𝑌 (𝐴𝐾 , 𝐵𝐿) with (weakly) diminishing returns to capital, increasing the quantity or augmentation of capital increases (does not affect) the marginal product of labor. Letting 𝐾̂ ≡ 𝐴𝐾 , 𝐿̂ ≡ 𝐵𝐿 and
differentiating 𝐾̂ 𝑌𝐾̂ + ̂𝐿𝑌𝐿̂ = 𝑌 with respect to 𝐾̂ ,
̂ ̂̂ =𝑌̂
𝑌𝐾̂ + 𝐾̂ 𝑌𝐾̂ 𝐾̂ + 𝐿𝑌
𝐿𝐾
𝐾
𝐾̂
⟹ 𝑌𝐿̂ 𝐾̂ = − 𝑌𝐾̂ 𝐾̂ ≥ 0.
𝐿̂
The introduction of humanoid robots is analogous to an increase in population, due
e.g. to immigration. If immigrants have the same distribution of skills as the native
population (𝜌 = 1), under constant returns to scale wages do not change, once the
capital needed to complement the larger population has accumulated. If immigrants
have a different distribution of skills (𝜌 < 1), comparative advantage allows gains from
trade. Wages may fall for native workers in the occupations at which the immigrants
are most relatively skilled, but the aggregate wage bill for natives must rise.

7
Labor-depleting technology. The observation above might suggest that falling
wages due to technological progress are only ever a partial equilibrium phenomenon.
However, automation can also be labor-depleting.
For illustration, suppose that goods can be produced in two sectors: (i) an 𝐴𝐾
robot-only sector and (ii) a Cobb-Douglas sector employing labor and equipment. Letting 𝑧 denote the equipment share of capital,
̄ 1−𝛼 .
𝑌 = 𝐴(1 − 𝑧)𝐾 + (𝑧𝐾 )𝛼 (𝐵𝐿)

(1)

The marginal product of capital in sector (i) equals 𝐴, and in sector (ii) it equals
̄ 1−𝛼 .
𝛼(𝑧𝐾 )𝛼−1 (𝐵𝐿)

(2)

Let 𝑧 ∗ denote the efficient equipment share of capital. If 𝐴 ≤ (2) even at 𝑧 = 1, then
𝑧 ∗ = 1. On a balanced growth path, with 𝐵 growing and 𝐴 fixed, the marginal product
of capital in each sector does not change, and 𝑧 ∗ = 1 is maintained. Following a
sufficient increase in robot productivity 𝐴, however, 𝑧 ∗ equalizes the marginal product
of capital across sectors:
∗

𝐴 = 𝛼(𝑧 𝐾 )

𝛼−1

̄ 1−𝛼
(𝐵𝐿)

⟹

1
𝐴 − 1−𝛼
𝐵𝐿̄
𝑧 =( )
.
𝛼
𝐾

∗

Substituting 𝑧 ∗ for 𝑧 into (1) and simplifying,
𝑌 = 𝐴𝐾 + ̃
𝐵𝐿,
𝛼

where 𝐵̃ ∝ 𝐴− 1−𝛼 𝐵.
Further increasing robot productivity thus expands the production possibilities
frontier in a way that amounts not only to capital augmentation but to labor depletion,
since capital is reallocated in equilibrium away from labor-augmenting uses. Wages
rise (𝑔𝐵̃ > 0) only if productivity improvements in sector (ii) proceed quickly enough
𝛼 𝑔 .4
to offset any such reallocation: that is, only if 𝑔𝐵 > 1−𝛼
𝐴
4 Caselli and Manning (2019) identify conditions under which automation is guaranteed not to lower

aggregate wages. A central condition is that the interest rate does not rise: if the marginal product
of capital does not rise despite an advance in what capital can do, this must be because of a labor
bottleneck. In the example of this subsection, decreases in wages are driven precisely by increases in
the interest rate 𝐴, which indexes the productivity of a robot without human assistance.

8
Analogy to an expanding varieties model. For another angle on why the impact
on the wage bill is ambiguous, consider an expanding-varieties growth model such as
Romer (1990). The share of any particular variety falls to zero as variety expands, but
expenditures on it are constant, even though the new varieties are modeled as gross
substitutes for the old.
The precise constancy is of course not a logical necessity, but it reveals that the
development of new gross substitutes does not necessarily raise or lower real expenditures on pre-existent goods and services. Horses were used for a larger share of
tasks in the past, before being eclipsed by motor vehicles, and sailboats were used for
a larger share of tasks before being eclipsed by motorboats; but total real expenditures
on horses and sailboats have since fluctuated with technology and taste without approaching zero (see e.g. American Horse Council, 2023). Korinek (2026) conjectures
that humans may remain in demand after full automation in services where consumers
value authentic human connection (e.g., childcare); competitive or performative activities in which the human identity of the performer matters (sports and the arts); religious services; and human oversight as the ultimate arbiter of values for AI alignment.
In a world of TAI we will doubtless be old-fashioned, but economic theory cannot tell
us the future relative prices of the old-fashioned services provided by humans.
Finally, it must be emphasized that even if the aggregate wage bill stagnates or
rises, wage inequality may grow such that many people cannot earn enough labor
income to live on. Sustained demand for the world’s best athletes, for example, could
keep the aggregate wage bill positive or rising while the majority, competing with
robots as in the model of labor-depleting technology above, find their wages driven to
zero.

2.3

Endogenous automation

So far we have treated TAI as an exogenous technological advance. The example above
illustrates that this advance may consist of a decline in the cost of robots, but it may
also follow endogenously from rising wages.
Suppose
1−𝛼

𝑌 = 𝐴(𝑧𝐾 )𝛼 (𝐿 + 𝜃(1 − 𝑧)𝐾 )

,

𝜃 > 0,

(3)

where 𝑧 again denotes the equipment share of capital. On a balanced growth path,

9
fixing 𝑧 = 1, the marginal product of equipment is constant, whereas the marginal
product of “labor”—human or robotic—grows exponentially. Since the cost of a robot
is fixed at 1/𝜃 units of output, they are built (𝑧 ∗ < 1) only once the marginal value of
converting equipment to robots is positive. In particular, once
1 𝛼
𝐾
>
,
𝐿
𝜃1−𝛼

(4)

capital and labor become perfect substitutes at the margin. Maintaining an efficient
allocation of capital, the production function reduces to
𝑌 = 𝐴(𝜃1−𝛼 𝐾 + 𝜃−𝛼 𝐿) 𝛼 𝛼 (1 − 𝛼)1−𝛼 .
As usual, fixing robot productivity 𝜃, output grows superexponentially—due to a combination of rising 𝐴 and exponential capital accumulation at fixed 𝐴—and the labor
share falls to zero. Capital accumulation no longer raises wages, as capital and labor
are now fungible on the margin. Technological progress does raise wages, fixing 𝜃,
but more generally wages depend on the direction of development; they fall if robot
productivity increases so much faster than TFP 𝐴 that 𝑔𝐴 − 𝛼𝑔𝜃 < 0.
The point that rising wages incentivize automation dates at least to Habakkuk
(1962). Hémous and Olsen (2022) offer a recent task-based treatment of the effect
along with a review of the relevant evidence. Hanson (2001) and Sasaki (2023) observe
that this logic applies no less to hypothetical machines that can automate all tasks,
inspiring the model above.
In short, though anticipations of full automation in the near term are driven by the
possibility of rapid increases in machine capabilities per unit cost (roughly 𝜃), these are
not necessary for full automation to occur eventually. As long as it is possible at some
cost to build machines that can do all work, rising wages will eventually render them
profitable, and then ever more so. This suggests that a regime of rapid growth and a
plummeting labor share will likely prevail at some point in the future, whether or not
economic data suggest that it is imminent. It will be difficult to permanently fulfill the
hope (Korinek and Stiglitz, 2020; Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2020; Brynjolfsson, 2022;
Acemoglu et al., 2026) of steering technological progress so that both the growth rate
and the labor share stay bounded above zero, let alone with the labor share remaining
close to its current level.

10

2.4

A fixed factor

A common objection to the feasibility of rapid, automation-driven growth is that natural resource constraints will halt growth in general. As Korinek and Stiglitz (2019)
discuss, a third factor in fixed supply which is a gross complement in production eventually bottlenecks output growth even under TAI; and as the effective quantity of machinery grows, the share of the fixed factor rises to one.
Such a hard resource constraint is unlikely to bind in the foreseeable future. The
natural resource share is below 5% and not appreciably rising (Eden and Kuruc, 2024).
We continue to consume energy less than one five-thousandth as quickly as sunlight
reaches the earth’s surface (World Energy Council, 2013),5 and the “rare-earth metals”
used in electronic and other industrial equipment are prevalent in low concentrations
throughout the Earth’s crust, so should not permanently bottleneck growth as long as
there is the energy to mine and refine them (Gosen et al., 2017). Nevertheless, the natural resource share is positive, and it is optimistic to suppose that resource constraints
will place no drag on long-run growth at all, as in the case of gross substitution. Following Hanson (2001), we therefore focus on the Cobb-Douglas case.
Growth and labor share. Let 𝑊̄ denote the fixed factor, and call it land for brevity.
Then output equals
𝑌 = 𝐴 𝐹 (𝐾 , ̄𝐿)𝛼̄ 𝑊̄ 1−𝛼̄ ,

(5)

where 𝐹 (⋅) is CRS, and its substitution parameter between 𝐾 and 𝐿 is non-positive
before the introduction of TAI and positive (perhaps one) after.
This case is equivalent to the Solow model given fixed population, with extended
̄ taking the place of capital and land taking the place of labor. Given
capital 𝐹 (𝐾 , 𝐿)
constant 𝑔𝐴 > 0, output grows exponentially (fixing saving and depreciation rates):
technology growth no longer replaces an exponential capital accumulation process
with a superexponential one, but a bounded process with an exponential one. The
land and extended capital shares are fixed at 1 − 𝛼̄ and 𝛼̄ respectively, and because
labor constitutes an ever smaller share of extended capital, its share falls to zero.
Though the land constraint prevents transformative AI from growing output superexponentially, if 𝛼̄ is near one this is a technicality. Because capital accumulates in
5 See also Our World in Data (2025) for updated energy consumption figures.

11
line with past output, the steady-state growth rate satisfies
𝑔𝑌 = 𝑔𝐴 + ̄𝛼𝑔𝑌

⟹

𝑔𝑌 =

1
𝑔𝐴 ,
1 − 𝛼̄

which rises without bound as 𝛼̄ → 1. Under a land share of 5%, automation raises the
capital share from 33% to 95% and the steady-state growth rate by more than an order
of magnitude.
Wages. The implications for wages are less sanguine. Without a land constraint,
Section 2.2 noted that:
• If any technological progress is labor-augmenting, wages grow even under perfect substitution.
• Even if all technological progress is capital-augmenting, the exploding capital
stock drives rapid wage growth if capital and labor are gross but imperfect substitutes.
With a land constraint, any complementarity between labor and capital is largely offset
by the fact that a rising capital stock lowers the marginal product of extended capital:
• Even if technological progress augments both labor and capital equally, as in (5),
the marginal product of (extended) capital—and thus the wage—is stagnant in
steady state, governed by savers’ discount rates and elasticities of intertemporal
substitution.
̄ = (𝑎(𝐴𝐾 )𝜌 + (1 − 𝑎)(𝐵𝐿)
̄ 𝜌 )1/𝜌 and all technological progress is
• If 𝐹 (𝐴𝐾 , 𝐵𝐿)
capital-augmenting, wages
𝑌 1−𝜌/𝛼̄ (1 − 𝑎)𝐵̄ 𝜌 𝐿̄ 𝜌−1
rise only if
𝛼̄ > 𝜌.
Perfect substitution (𝜌 = 1) guarantees that, as the marginal product of capital is
asymptotically constant, the marginal products of effective capital and of labor
fall.
Skilled labor as a fixed factor. The logic above applies equally if we interpret
certain worker skills as the fixed factor 𝑊̄ (with unskilled labor as ̄𝐿). Using a similar

12
model but with this reinterpretation, Hémous and Olsen (2022) attribute rising wage
inequality to automation. As discussed in Section 2.2, an increase in effective capital
must raise the aggregate wage bill when labor and capital are the only factors, but can
lower wages in jobs for which capital is more substitutable than average. If workers
can shift away from these occupations, their wages rise in the long run, but this is not
possible if the occupations with rising wages demand skills they cannot acquire.
Many have attributed growing wage inequality throughout the developed world
in recent decades to automation. It is worth emphasizing that differences in capital’s
substitutability for different kinds of work can just as easily make wages more equal.
Indeed, AI to date appears have to widened the productivity distribution in some domains (including debate (Roldán-Monés, 2024) and developing-world entrepreneurship Otis et al. (2024)) but narrowed it in others (including coding (Peng et al., 2023),
customer service (Brynjolfsson et al., 2025), writing (Noy and Zhang, 2023), product
design (Dell’Acqua et al., 2023), advertising (Chen and Chan, 2025), and legal analysis
(Choi and Schwarcz, 2025)).

2.5

A task-based framework

Task-based models provide a more granular framework for understanding how automation reshapes production by decomposing production into distinct activities that
can be performed by either labor or capital. Building on pioneering work by Zeira
(1998) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018), this literature examines how the progressive automation of tasks affects factor demand, income distribution, and economic
growth. The long-run implications of automation for growth, factor shares, and wages
in a task-based model are most clearly illustrated by Aghion et al. (2019).
Suppose output requires a (unit) continuum of symmetric tasks:
1
𝜌

𝑌 = (∫

𝑌𝑖 𝑑𝑖)

1/𝜌

,

𝜌 < 0.

(6)

0

Tasks 𝑖 ≤ 𝑏 ∈ [0, 1] are automatable, in that they can be performed by capital or labor,
and tasks (𝑏, 1] are not, in that they can only be performed by labor:
⎧
⎪
⎪𝐾𝑖 + 𝐿𝑖 , 𝑖 ≤ 𝑏;
𝑌𝑖 = ⎨
⎪
𝐿,
𝑖 > 𝑏.
⎪
⎩ 𝑖

13
̄ so long as there is at least as much capital per automatable
Given factor stocks 𝐾 and 𝐿,
task as labor per non-automatable task—i.e. as long as
𝐿̄
𝐾
≥
𝑏
1−𝑏

(7)

—it is inefficient to use labor on an automatable task. Then, by symmetry, capital is
spread equally across automatable tasks so 𝐾 /𝑏 units of capital are used on each, and
̄
by the same token, 𝐿/(1
− 𝑏) units of labor on each non-automated task. Substituting
for 𝑌𝑖 in (6) yields
𝜌 1/𝜌
𝐾 𝜌
𝐿
𝑌 = [𝑏 ( ) + (1 − 𝑏)(
= [(𝐴𝐾 )𝜌 + (𝐵𝐿)𝜌 ]1/𝜌 ,
)
]
𝑏
1−𝑏
1−𝜌

(8)

1−𝜌

where 𝐴 = 𝑏 𝜌 and 𝐵 = (1 − 𝑏) 𝜌 .
Since automatability allows capital to perform more tasks, one might imagine that
it is equivalent to capital-augmenting technology. Here, however, it is actually equivalent to labor-augmenting—and capital-depleting!—technology.6 As 𝑏 rises from 0 to 1,
1−𝜌
𝐴 falls from ∞ to 1 and 𝐵 rises from 1 to ∞. In particular, 𝑔𝐵 = 𝜌 𝑔1−𝑏 , so that 𝐵 and
output grow exponentially if a constant fraction of the remaining non-automatable
tasks are automated each year.
For intuition, observe that each time 1 − 𝑏 halves, capital can be spread more
thinly across the widened range of automatable tasks, but labor is concentrated twice
as heavily in each non-automatable task. Automation therefore allows capital to serve
as a better complement to labor. A marginal unit of labor is spread across fewer nonautomatable tasks, producing a larger increase to the supply of each. Given abundant
capital, this produces a larger increase to output.
Transformative automation. Automating all tasks is plainly transformative, rendering capital and labor perfect substitutes. More subtly, Korinek and Suh (2024) show
that if automation outpaces capital accumulation, it renders the two factors perfect
substitutes on the margin so that (7) fails (or holds with equality). If it does so permanently, growth proceeds as in Section 2.1. Once automation is complete, or advancing
rapidly enough that accelerating it would no longer allow resources to be allocated
6 Jones and Liu (2024) offer a similar model in which explicit capital-augmenting technology renders

the reduced-form capital-augmenting technology term constant at all times, not just asymptotically.

14
more efficiently, it will be valuable to turn instead to increasing the replication rate of
capital.
Wages after transformative automation.
Korinek and Suh (2024) calibrate a
production function similar to (8) to macroeconomic data and study the implications
of 𝑏 rising to 1 in finite time. They find that wages rise and then fall, stagnating at a
low level once the factors are substitutes.
The conclusion that wages rise initially is robust, since on the current margin, an
increase to 𝑏 is an increase to labor-augmenting technology. The point that wages
may ultimately fall—simply by accelerating the process that has driven centuries of
wage growth—is also important to recognize, but here depends on precisely how the
transition to full automation unfolds. Because we do not observe factor-augmenting
technology terms directly, any calibration of 𝐵𝜌 and 𝜌 in the reduced-form production
function (8)—suggesting that the wage will equal 𝐵 once 𝜌 = 1—can also be interpreted
as a calibration of 𝑎1 (𝑎2 𝐵)𝜌 and 𝜌 in a production function of the form
𝑌 = [(𝐴𝐾 )𝜌 + 𝑎1 (𝑎2 𝐵𝐿)𝜌 ]1/𝜌
for arbitrary 𝑎1 > 0 and 𝑎2 = 𝑎1 . The second calibration, however, would suggest
that the full-automation wage will equal 𝑎1 𝑎2 𝐵.
−1/𝜌

New tasks and the limits of task creation. While the framework above treats the
task space as fixed, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018) and subsequent work emphasize
that technological progress has historically created new tasks alongside automating
existing ones. Autor et al. (2024) documents how the emergence of new work has offset
automation’s displacement effects. We perform myriad tasks today that would have
been inconceivable a century ago—from web development to data science—though on
some level this may represent specialization within broader categories: most contemporary white-collar professions could be viewed as specialized descendants of what
might once have been termed “scribe” or “philosopher”. Naive extrapolation from current automation rates of O*NET-catalogued tasks may substantially underestimate the
distance to transformative AI, by failing to account for the continuous emergence of
new, often more complex tasks.
Yet there exists a fundamental constraint: humans possess some finite set of cog-

15
nitive and physical capabilities, and once machines can replicate these underlying capabilities, they will necessarily be able to perform all feasible human tasks, including
any newly created ones. The task-based framework above clarifies that once this capability threshold is crossed and condition (7) binds or fails, the economy transitions
to a regime of rapid growth and declining labor share, regardless of whether new tasks
continue to emerge.

3

Automating R&D

So far we have taken technological development to be constant and exogenous (beyond noting that once labor is no longer a bottleneck, it will be efficient to invest in
developing capital-augmenting technology). Even so, we have seen that AI that allows
capital to sufficiently automate production would probably greatly accelerate growth.
The growth impact of automating technological development but not production is
more ambiguous. Through this channel in isolation, AI is more likely to have only
a moderate impact on long-run growth, but also more likely to have an impact more
explosive than any considered in Section 2.
Many model-based analyses of the growth impacts of AI have tended to focus on
impacts on production rather than R&D (see e.g. Acemoglu, 2025; Aghion and Bunel,
2024). This is in part because production is better understood, but also in part because
R&D tends to be high-skilled, and historically, low-skilled work has been more exposed to automation. In the case of AI, this historical regularity may soon no longer
apply. High-skilled occupations are disproportionately LLM-exposed, and research
occupations in particular: Eloundou et al. (2024) find that out of 11 job groupings,
“scientists and researchers” are most exposed and “technologists” are next. At the
firm level, AI contributes to growth primarily by speeding product innovation (Babina
et al., 2024). Many of AI’s most important achievements to date have been scientific,
such as the protein folding breakthrough that won AI pioneer Demis Hassabis a Nobel
Prize in chemistry. Nor should this be surprising: the output of an AI model query is
a non-rival packet of information, not a widget.

16

3.1

Automating R&D in a semi-endogenous model

Assume that capital and labor remain gross complements in production, so that approximately
𝑌 ∝ 𝐴𝐿.
In a standard semi-endogenous growth model (Jones, 1995),
𝑔𝐴 ∝ 𝐴−𝛽 𝐿𝜆 ∶

(9)

𝛽 > 0 captures the extent to which ideas are harder to find when the frontier is further
advanced, and 𝜆 < 1 captures the returns to scale of research work, i.e. the extent to
which research is imperfectly parallelizable. Because 𝛽 > 0, long-run technology
growth requires population growth. In steady state, 𝑔𝐴 = 𝑔𝐿 𝜆/𝛽.
If AI allows capital to serve as a gross substitute for labor in R&D, we have roughly
𝑔𝐴 ∝ 𝐴−𝛽 𝐾 𝜆
∝ 𝐴−𝛽 (𝐴𝐿)𝜆 = 𝐴𝜆−𝛽 𝐿𝜆 ,

(10)

since the capital stock grows with output. Capital now drives sustained growth as
long as 𝛽 ≤ 𝜆—and hyperbolic growth if the inequality is strict.
Bloom et al. (2020) estimate 𝜆/𝛽 ≈ 1/3. This parameter estimate suggests that
automating R&D alone would not sustain exponential growth, let alone explosive
growth, given a constant population.
Acceleration despite the need for population growth. Given population growth,
however, automating R&D raises the steady-state growth rate from 𝑔𝐿 𝜆/𝛽 to 𝑔𝐿 𝜆/(𝛽−
𝜆): i.e., if 𝜆/𝛽 = 1/3, from 𝑔𝐿 /3 to 𝑔𝐿 /2.
Furthermore, unless the capital requirement for an automated researcher is very
high, automating R&D permits a transitory period of rapid growth as capital pours
into the research sector. Carlsmith (2020) estimates that the human brain performs
approximately 1015 computations per second. AI software as capable and efficient as
the brain would let the stock of Nvidia GPUs in early 2026 support about 10 million
virtual researchers, based on estimates by Emberson and Owen (2025). This capac-

17
ity is about equal to the current global researcher population (UNESCO Institute for
Statistics, 2024) and has doubled around every ten months for the last six years (Emberson and Owen, 2025). Going forward, therefore, even if only a small fraction of
computing capacity is used for research purposes, total research effort could rapidly
expand. Given 𝛽 > 𝜆, a growing supply of hands to build these chips will be necessary
to sustain growth in the very long run; but as spending on information processing
equipment constitutes only 2% of US GDP,7 automating R&D could permit a large
increase in research effort before this constraint binds.
Given that machines capable of fully substituting for human labor in all production
tasks are feasible in principle, R&D acceleration shortens the development horizon for
such systems. It may be, therefore, that the large acceleration to technological development induced by automating R&D would be temporary if R&D remained automated
in isolation, but will be permanent in practice by hastening the arrival of full automation more generally.

3.2

Explosive growth in a semi-endogenous model?

It is also possible that, if research is automated, 𝛽 < 𝜆 will obtain, so that technologydriven explosive growth will follow even if production always requires labor. This is
for at least three reasons.
Larger vs. more numerous systems. While labor remains the primary input to
R&D, each additional unit of resources must take the form of a discrete brain, able
only very slowly to communicate with the world outside its skull. The returns to
increasing R&D investment may diminish more slowly, or even increase, when larger
investments may take the form of larger (not just more numerous) well-integrated
systems (Sotala, 2012). That is, “𝜆” may prove higher in (10) than in (9).8 By analogy,
we would underestimate the scale effect of increasing population size if we imagined
that people required their own farmsteads and could not agglomerate in labs or cities.
Similarly, Agrawal et al. (2019) observe that, in a Weitzman (1998)-style model in
which technological progress is made by discovering fruitful combinations of existing
7 In 2025, $0.63T out of $31T according to U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (2026a,b).

8 Indeed, AI progress to date has benefited greatly not only from increases in the raw computation

used to train models, but from the Raina et al. (2009) discovery that GPUs allow more of the relevant
computation to be done in parallel, and from the ongoing development of ever larger chips that permit
even more parallel computations with low latency (see e.g. Kundu et al. (2025)).

18
ideas, ideas may get harder to find due partly to the human brain’s inability to consider
large combinations of ideas at once. If so, as the authors show, automated R&D carried
out by large and growing AI models may structurally face a lower value of “𝛽”.
Copies of Einstein. Ekerdt and Wu (2024) argue that, as the share of the population
in research has grown, average researcher ability has declined. In the AI context, this
selection effect can be avoided by running multiple copies of the most capable models.
Absent selection, Ekerdt and Wu estimate 𝜆/𝛽 ≈ 3/5.
Returns to R&D diminish slowly in hardware and software. Bloom et al. find
wide variation in the returns to R&D across industries. Moore’s Law—the doubling of
semiconductor efficiency roughly every 18 months—has been supported by a growing workforce in semiconductor R&D, but this workforce has grown only one fifth as
quickly. If semiconductor R&D has not benefited from spillovers from other industries,
this implies that the industry has exhibited 𝜆/𝛽 ≈ 5. Thus if R&D were automated and
semiconductors were its sole input, growth could easily be explosive.9
Furthermore, the number of effective artificial researchers increases not only in
the quantity and efficiency of our hardware but also in the efficiency of our software.
Eth and Davidson (2025), reviewing the literature across language models, computer
vision models, and other domains, estimate that the raw computational requirements
of many AI capabilities have tended to roughly halve each year. As the number of
AI researchers has not grown quite as quickly, this implies an estimate of 𝜆/𝛽 > 1
in the domain of software efficiency as well. At least before accounting for spillovers
and other inputs, this suggests that the number of effective virtual researchers could
explode, and drive explosive growth more generally, even absent hardware improvements.
Productivity improvements, however, may require not only explicit R&D effort but
also a process of “learning by doing”. That is, the information generated by real-world
economic activity may be a gross complement to R&D labor and capital, so that the
useful research outputs of even a large number of virtual Einsteins would eventually be
bottlenecked without growth in the information generated by the economy at large.10
9 For an analysis of how spillovers can inflate an industry-level estimate of the returns to R&D, see

Davidson et al. (2026).
10 The “scaling laws” describing performance of AI models across a very wide range of domains (see
Villalobos (2023) for a review) imply that compute and data are gross complements in AI training.

19
Arguably, the capabilities of generative AI models have advanced rapidly in recent
years due to the discovery of ways to harness the vast pool of data that constitutes
the Internet, and further significant advances will require gathering, codifying, and
continuously updating training data capturing much of what people learn in the course
their work. In this case, the bottlenecking input to technological progress, once R&D is
automated, may ultimately be proportional to output (as in (10)) rather than effective
computation.

3.3

Automating R&D in fully endogenous models

The rate of technological development has remained roughly constant in frontier
economies for more than a century though the number of researchers has greatly
grown. On a semi-endogenous account, this is because the number of researchers required to sustain a given growth rate rises as the technological frontier advances. That
is, the primary bottleneck to faster technological development is a lack of research labor. As detailed above, it follows straightforwardly that if this bottleneck is relieved,
with capital effectively increasing the supply of researchers, growth accelerates.
On an endogenous growth account, by contrast, a fixed population can sustain a
constant growth rate. As a result, the endogenous growth literature since Young (1998)
and Aghion and Howitt (1998, ch. 12.2) has proposed forces that constrain the growth
rate despite a growing population. If these forces are strong enough, they prevent
automating research from delivering explosive growth.
Extreme non-parallelizability. If technology growth takes roughly the form (9),
constant 𝑔𝐴 is incompatible with positive 𝑔𝐿 if 𝛽 = 0 and 𝜆 > 0. On the semiendogenous interpretation, 𝛽 > 0. The alternative endorsed by some endogenous
accounts is effectively that 𝛽 = 0 and 𝜆 = 0. It is difficult to disentangle the variables empirically: Bloom et al. (2020) estimate 𝜆/𝛽, for example, but cannot identify
whether both variables are very low or very high.
Concretely, suppose that
𝑔𝐴 ∝ 𝑓 (𝐿),

(11)

where 𝑓 (⋅) is increasing but lim𝐿→∞ 𝑓 (𝐿) = 𝑓̄ < ∞. Then the growth rate is constant

20
with a constant population but can rise only to 𝑓̄ if the population grows,11 perhaps
due to the need for serial experiments. Automating R&D allows the growth rate to
approach 𝑓̄ more quickly, or allows the growth rate to rise somewhat when a fixed
population would otherwise have rendered it constant, as 𝐾 ∝ 𝐴𝐿 replaces 𝐿 in (11).
Nevertheless, the long-run growth rate is constant.
As discussed in the previous section, automated research systems may face a lower
penalty to parallelizing R&D than populations of human researchers, and the penalty
may fall over time with advances in hardware. That is, in the present context, we
might imagine that automating research will deliver roughly
𝑔𝐴 ∝ ℎ(𝐴)𝑓 (𝐾 ),
so that the maximum growth rate achievable by scaling research investment at a given
time equals ℎ(𝐴)𝑓̄ and rises with 𝐴. If so, whether automating R&D will deliver explosive growth depends on the shape of ℎ(⋅), a question about which today we can only
speculate.
Creative destruction. In other endogenous growth models, explosive growth is
technologically feasible with a growing population,12 but R&D efforts of the kind that
could deliver it are limited by “Schumpeterian” dynamics. An innovator earns profits
from developing a more efficient way to produce a given product for only as long as
this process remains on the technological frontier. An accelerating stream of investments in productivity improvements cannot be sustained in equilibrium, as it would
shrink the expected duration of each innovator’s monopoly to zero.
Automating R&D may therefore fail to raise the growth rate. Aghion et al. (2019,
Appendix) discuss this point via a model in which partially automating R&D actually
causes the growth rate to fall,13 but the point can also be seen directly from the fact
that many Schumpeterian endogeneous growth models are in fact “lab equipment”
models already14 : capital is modeled as the only input to R&D. This unrealistic assumption can be made for simplicity, without predicting explosive growth, because
11 This is, very roughly, proposed by Young (1998) and Lashkari (2023): see Trammell (2025).
12 Or even a fixed population: see Trammell (2025).

13 In their model, technological development proceeds in two stages.

AI accelerates only one but
thereby shortens the monopoly earned by successfully investing in the other. The resulting disincentive
yields slower growth on balance.
14 Including seminally Aghion and Howitt (1998, ch. 12.2); see Trammell (2025) for a review.

21
the central bottleneck to growth is not a lack of resources available to devote to research but an arbitrage equation ensuring that innovations arrive slowly enough to
justify developing them.

4

Full automation

Naturally, AI will have the most radical effects on growth if it renders capital a gross
substitute for labor in both production and R&D.
If the long-run rate of technological development is constrained to be constant,
e.g. for the reasons discussed in Section 3.3, we are in the world of Section 2 with
constant 𝑔𝐴 > 0. With capital serving as a gross substitute for labor in production, so
that 𝑌 ≈ 𝐴𝐾 , growth is double-exponential: the growth rate itself grows at rate 𝑔𝐴 .
We will assume the semi-endogenous model for the remainder of this section.
The Cobb-Douglas edge case. In a semi-endogenous model, as we have seen, the
growth rate is constrained primarily by R&D inputs, so under full automation it can
rise arbitrarily rapidly alongside the capital stock. In fact, the feedback loop from technology to output to capital to technology is strong enough that even a Cobb-Douglas
production function, in combination with a Cobb-Douglas R&D function, yields hyperbolic growth if the exponents on capital are sufficiently high (Aghion et al., 2019).
Fixing population, we have
𝑌 ∝ 𝐴𝐾 𝛼 ,
(12)

𝑔𝐴 ∝ 𝐴−𝛽 𝐾 𝜉 .

To intuit the parameter condition necessary to trigger hyperbolic growth, observe that
if the capital stock is proportional to output,
𝐾 ∝ 𝐴𝐾 𝛼

1

⟹

𝐾 ∝ 𝐴 1−𝛼 .

(13)

Substituting (13) into (12) yields
𝜉

𝑔𝐴 ∝ 𝐴 1−𝛼 −𝛽 .

(14)

22
Technology, capital, and output thus grow hyperbolically if
𝜉
>𝛽
1−𝛼

(15)

and exponentially only if the terms are equal. If the inequality is reversed, the feedback loop at hand delivers only power-functional growth, so that exponential growth
requires growth in population.15
Gross substitution. Gross substitution in R&D is equivalent to the case of 𝜉 = 𝜆
(or more, as discussed in Section 3.1). Whether it delivers hyperbolic growth remains
𝜆 > 𝛽—is of course a weakening of
ambiguous, but condition (15) with 𝜉 = 𝜆—i.e. 1−𝛼
the 𝜆 > 𝛽 required given gross complementarity in production.
Gross substitution in production is equivalent here to the case of 𝛼 = 1. It delivers
hyperbolic growth for any value of 𝜉 or 𝛽.
A fixed factor. Under a Cobb-Douglas natural resource constraint, as discussed in
Section 2.4, the capital share can rise only to 𝛼̄ < 1, where 1 − 𝛼̄ is the natural resource
share. Because, again, the natural resource share is not even 5%, this constraint will
not prevent hyperbolic growth in the event of fully automated production given any
non-negligible capital share in R&D.
With “𝐿” in place of “𝐾 ”, this model also describes a world in which labor remains
necessary for production and R&D but population grows proportionally to output.
Kremer (1993) uses just such a model to explain the superexponential—indeed, arguably roughly hyperbolic (Roodman, 2020)—population growth that obtained across
one million years of the Malthusian past.
Growth with fixed resources and fixed technology presumably cannot continue
forever, even under full automation. Natural resources may thus eventually come to
bottleneck output more strongly. That is, fixing resources, sustained growth may require the development of resource-augmenting technology “𝑍”. Suppose that, absent
automation,
𝑌 = 𝑌 (𝐾 , 𝐴𝐿, 𝑍 𝑊̄ ),
15 Davidson et al. (2026) offer a generalization of condition (15) in a model in which both hardware

and software improvements can increase the number of effective “virtual researchers”, as motivated by
the discussion in Section 3.2.

23
where 𝑌 (⋅) is CRS and 𝐾 , 𝐴𝐿, and 𝑍 𝑊̄ are gross complements.16 In this case, automating production yields approximately
𝑌 = 𝑌 (𝐴𝐾 , 𝐴𝐾 , 𝑍 𝑊̄ ) ≈ 𝑍 𝑊̄
in the long run, so that output grows with technology as in Section 3. Here, if 𝜆 < 𝛽,
growth eventually slows—even, in this case, with both production and research fully
automated.17
Because growth does not begin to decelerate until the resource share has risen to
the point of reversing inequality (15), however, automating both sectors in the near
future would still yield a substantial period of accelerating growth.

5

Summary

Once production is sufficiently automated, output growth is likely to accelerate, and
this acceleration will likely continue for the foreseeable future. Automating R&D may
not deliver explosive growth on its own (except by speeding the development of ways
to automate production); whether it does so depends largely on whether automated
research proves highly parallelizable and on whether it requires inputs that scale with
economic activity rather than with effective computation. Even if fully automating
R&D in isolation would not dramatically speed up growth, however, more R&D automation could greatly enhance the acceleration to growth induced by automating
production.
Automating R&D in isolation would probably preserve a positive labor share, as
would developing machines that could self-replicate but could not well substitute for
labor in producing consumption goods. Otherwise, the burst in output made feasible
by a qualitative advance in automation will almost all accrue to capital, driving the
labor share toward zero. It will probably be very inefficient (and so very difficult) to
steer technology in a labor-augmenting direction permanently.
16 We must also suppose that historically 𝑔
𝑍

= 𝑔𝐴 + 𝑔𝐿 , maintaining constant factor shares. The
elasticity of substitution between energy (or natural resources in general) and other resources is often
estimated to be much less than one over short time horizons but to rise significantly with the horizon
(Koetse et al., 2008; van der Werf, 2008), suggesting that the resource share has indeed remained low
only due to the ongoing development of resource-augmenting technology.
17 If there is a finite pool of technologies as well, 𝛽 must eventually rise without bound, so that 𝑔 = 0
𝐴
at high 𝐴.

24
Whether the wage bill will rise or fall in the limit of automation depends on subtleties about the long-run direction of technology and tastes, and the degree of returns
to scale, about which little can be said today.
The long-run scenarios may be summarized as follows. In each case we assume
that capital grows more quickly than population and that, given gross complementarity between labor and capital in production, technological development shifts from
being labor- to capital-augmenting.

25

Growth

Labor
share

Wages

2 factors; GS

D

→0

D

2 factors; PS

D

→0

S or → 0

CD for consump., GS/PS for capital

D

∼

D

3 factors (CD resource constr.); GS

+

→0

∼

3 factors (CD resource constr.); PS

+

→0

→0

Scenario18
Production automated

R&D automated, or both automated given a GC resource constraint 19
Semi-endog., weak feedback

+

Semi-endog., intermed. feedback

D

Semi-endog., strong feedback

H

Hard parallelizability constraint

+

Schumpeterian

∼

Both automated
Semi-endog., very weak feedback
and CD resource constr.
Semi-endog., otherwise

+ or D
H

Table 1: Summary of TAI scenarios

18 “CD”, “GS”, and “PS” stand for Cobb-Douglas, gross but not perfect substitution, and perfect substi-

tution. “+”, “D”, and “H” refer to cases in which AI produces increases to a variable’s long-run growth
rate, double-exponential growth, and hyperbolic growth. “S” refers to cases in which AI causes the
variable to stagnate above zero. “∼” refers to cases in which AI has an ambiguous effect on the variable.
19 “Weak”, “intermediate”, and “strong” research feedback refer to the 𝜆/𝛽 < 1, = 1, and > 1 cases.
We here focus only on growth, on the view that wages and the labor share will still mainly be governed
by production.

26

6

Conclusion

From AI to automation. Interest in the question of what will follow from nearcomplete automation has grown recently because the rapid pace of recent AI progress
suggests that the automation of production and/or R&D may be on the horizon.
AI to date has not had the consequences that might be expected to precede such
a drastic economic transformation. As Nordhaus (2021) documents, capital and labor
remain (at least weakly) gross complements, the growth rate is not rising, the IT share
of capital is not skyrocketing, and any increases in the capital share are modest and
easily attributable to other forces.20 Humlum and Vestergaard (2026) find that LLMs
have been adopted rapidly—over a billion users within 2.5 years of their introduction—
but so far seem to have delivered only modest productivity improvements.
Nevertheless, the capabilities of AI systems have advanced at extraordinary rates.
As first documented by Kwa et al. (2025), the maximum software engineering task
length AI systems can handle has been doubling approximately every seven months.
Amodei (2025) projects that coding could be fully automated in 2026. Should capabilities continue advancing at comparable rates, the comprehensive automation of
computer-based work may follow shortly thereafter—potentially providing sufficient
technological foundation to devise methods for automating remaining economic activities.
An alternative analytical lens for understanding the trajectory toward full automation focuses on improvements in sample efficiency. Deep learning has enabled AI systems to match or exceed human performance in domains such as coding, language
processing, and strategic gaming, where either substantial public data exists or synthetic data generation is feasible. Nevertheless, the human brain remains orders of
magnitude more sample-efficient than current machine learning algorithms, requiring far less data to acquire comparable non-trivial skills. Eth and Davidson (2025)
review algorithmic progress across language models, computer vision, and related domains and finds that data requirements for training AI capabilities have approximately
halved annually in recent years. If the current human-machine sample efficiency gap
spans roughly four orders of magnitude, these rates suggest AI systems could achieve
20 Work in progress by one of the authors confirms that updating Nordhaus’s analysis to 2025 does

not change these conclusions, and that, on examining the supply chains for robotics and computer
equipment, there is similarly little evidence for a capital-goods-driven growth explosion of the kind
described at the end of Section 2.1.

27
human-level learning efficiency within one to two decades.
AI is starting to contribute to R&D, and the high capital share in AI R&D specifically (Besiroglu et al., 2024) suggests that capital is, in some sense, contributing significantly to its own improvement. As AI R&D is automated ever more fully, AI capabilities could advance ever more rapidly. Erdil et al. (2025) and Lifland et al. (2025)
calibrate models of this feedback mechanism—albeit with speculative elements—and
predict near-complete R&D automation within several years, precipitating rapid economic growth thereafter. Jones and Tonetti (2026) offer a model in a similar spirit,
but whose bottlenecks bind more tightly, yielding explosive growth only after 2050
or 2100. Informed partly by these models, the median forecast on the prediction platform Metaculus places AGI in 2039 (Metaculus, 2026). A central characteristic of the
R&D-initiated “singularity” hypothesis is its prediction of rapid, nearly discontinuous
transformation in economic conditions. Consequently, the absence of observable effects in current economic data cannot definitively refute the possibility of imminent
dramatic change: the theory itself predicts minimal advance warning in conventional
economic indicators.
Preparing for economic transformation. While Piketty and Zucman (2014)’s
controversial claim that capital and labor are already gross substitutes conflicts with
the consensus view—supported by direct evidence including Gechert et al.’s (2022)
comprehensive review and theoretical arguments that gross substitutability should
yield accelerating growth and a declining labor share—AI may render the claim true
in the future, and vindicate Piketty (2014)’s concern about twenty-first century capital
concentration. It may be valuable to consider policy responses that could mitigate
extreme distributional consequences (Korinek and Lockwood, 2025).
Preparing for dangerous AI. Concerns about existential risk from advanced AI
systems, articulated in early theoretical work (Bostrom, 2014) and recently amplified
through public statements like Center for AI Safety (2023), represent perhaps the most
extreme form of economic transformation: complete cessation of economic activity
through catastrophic failure. Both proponents and skeptics of such risks employ AI’s
capacity for generating radical economic growth as a proxy measure for its potential to inflict systemic damage (see Davidson (2021) and Narayanan and Kapoor (2025)
for contrasting perspectives). The scenarios analyzed throughout this paper carry

28
differential risk profiles: a “software-only singularity” driven purely by R&D automation presents unique challenges through its potential for rapid, unobservable acceleration beneath conventional economic indicators, while scenarios involving automated
physical production imply AI systems capable of tangibly affecting the material world
without requiring human intermediation, raising distinct safety concerns about autonomous physical systems.
The economic valuation of existential risk mitigation—quantifying optimal consumption sacrifices to reduce catastrophic probabilities—has generated substantial recent analysis (Jones, 2024, 2025; Shulman and Thornley, 2025), though excessive precaution may paradoxically increase long-term risks through delayed beneficial development (Trammell and Aschenbrenner, 2026). Policy responses center on established
approaches: advancing technical AI safety research to ensure system alignment and
robustness, and developing governance frameworks capable of managing rapid capability transitions while maintaining incentives for innovation.
The imperative of preparation. The economic transformation analyzed throughout this paper may represent humanity’s most consequential transition since the Industrial Revolution, or perhaps since the Neolithic. While considerable uncertainty remains regarding both the timing and precise mechanisms, the potential magnitude of
change demands serious preparatory efforts commensurate with the stakes involved.
The scenarios we have examined, from explosive growth driven by self-replicating or
self-improving capital to radical redistributions of economic returns, are not merely
theoretical curiosities but plausible trajectories that could materialize within decades
or even years. The computational and algorithmic progress documented here suggests
we may have limited time to design institutions capable of managing unprecedented
growth rates, distributional upheaval, and the accompanying risks.
Yet this moment also presents extraordinary opportunity: if navigated successfully,
the automation of cognitive and physical labor could usher in an era of prosperity
that liberates humanity from millennia of drudgery (Korinek and Juelfs, 2024). The
frameworks we have reviewed provide tools for reasoning about these transitions.
Whether the coming transformation proves to be humanity’s greatest triumph or its
final chapter may depend critically on the decisions made in the narrow window before
these technologies reach their transformative thresholds. Given both the promise and
peril inherent in transformative AI, even modest investments in understanding and

29
shaping this transition represent perhaps the highest-return activities our profession
can engage in.

30

References
Acemoglu, Daron, “Labor- and Capital-Augmenting Technical Change,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2003, 1 (1), 1–37.
, Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton University Press, 2009.
, “The Simple Macroeconomics of AI,” Economic Policy, 2025, 40 (121), 13–58.
and Pascual Restrepo, “The Race Between Man and Machine: Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (6),
1488–1542.
and , “The Wrong Kind of AI? Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Labour Demand,”
Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 2020, 13 (1), 25–35.
, David Autor, and Simon Johnson, “Building Pro-Worker Artificial Intelligence,” 2026.
NBER working paper 34854.
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1998.
and Simon Bunel, “AI and Growth: Where Do We Stand?,” 2024. Working paper.
, Benjamin F. Jones, and Charles I. Jones, “Artificial Intelligence and Economic Growth,”
in Ajay Agrawal, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, eds., The Economics of Artificial Intelligence:
An Agenda, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019, pp. 237–282.
Agrawal, Ajay, John McHale, and Alex Oettl, “Finding Needles in Haystacks: Artificial Intelligence and Recombinant Growth,” in Ajay Agrawal, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, eds.,
The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda, National Bureau of Economic Research,
2019, pp. 149–174.
American Horse Council, “2023 Economic Impact of the Horse Industry in the USA,” 2023.
Accessed Aug. 15, 2025.
Amodei, Dario, “CEO Speaker Series with Dario Amodei of Anthropic,” Council on Foreign
Relations, CEO Speaker Series 2025.
Autor, David, Caroline Chin, Anna Maria Salomons, and Bryan Seegmiller, “New Frontiers: The Origins and Content of New Work, 1940–2018,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2024, 139 (3), 1399–1455. NBER Working Paper 30389.

31
Autor, David H. and David Dorn, “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization
of the US Labor Market,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1553–97.
Babina, Tania, Anastassia Fedyk, Alex He, and James Hodson, “Artificial Intelligence,
Firm Growth, and Product Innovation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2024, 151 (103745).
Benzell, Seth G. and Victor Yifan Ye, “Simulating the Global Effect of Transformative AI:
Growth, Welfare, Economic Power, and Policy Responses,” 2024. Working paper.
Berg, Andrew, Edward F Buffie, and Luis-Felipe Zanna, “Should We Fear the Robot Revolution? (The Correct Answer Is Yes),” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2018, 97, 117–148.
Besiroglu, Tamay, Nicholas Emery-Xu, and Neil Thompson, “Economic impacts of AIaugmented R&D,” Research Policy, 2024, 53 (7).
Bloom, Nicholas, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb, “Are Ideas
Getting Harder to Find?,” American Economic Review, 2020, 110 (4), 1104–1144.
Bostrom, Nick, Superintelligence, Oxford University Press, 2014.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, “The Turing Trap: The Promise and Peril of Human-Like Artificial Intelligence,” Dædalus, 2022, 151 (2), 267–84.
, Danielle Li, and Lindsey Raymond, “Generative AI at Work,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2025, 140 (2), 889–942.
Carlsmith, Joseph, “How Much Computational Power Does It Take to Match the Human
Brain?,” Open Philanthropy Report, 2020.
Caselli, Francesco and Alan Manning, “Robot Arithmetic: New Technology and Wages,”
American Economic Review: Insights, 2019, 1 (1), 1–12.
Center for AI Safety, “Statement on AI Risk,” 2023.
Chen, Zenan and Jason Chan, “Large Language Model in Creative Work: The Role of Collaboration Modality and User Expertise,” 2025. Working paper.
Choi, Johnathan H. and Daniel Schwarcz, “AI Assistance in Legal Analysis: an Empirical
Study,” Journal of Legal Education, 2025, 73 (2).
Davidson, Tom, “Could Advanced AI Drive Explosive Economic Growth?,” Technical Report,
Open Philanthropy 2021.

32
, Basil Halperin, Tom Houlden, and Anton Korinek, “When Does Automating AI Research Produce Explosive Growth? Feedback Loops in Innovation Networks,” 2026.
Dell’Acqua, Fabrizio, Edward McFowland III, Ethan R. Mollick, Hila Lifshitz-Assaf,
Katherine Kellogg, Saran Rajendran, Lisa Krayer, François Candelon, and Karim R.
Lakhani, “Navigating the Jagged Technological Frontier: Field Experimental Evidence of
the Effects of AI on Knowledge Worker Productivity and Quality,” 2023. Working paper.
Eden, Maya and Kevin Kuruc, “The Long-run Relationship Between Per Capita Incomes
and Population Size,” 2024. GPI Working Paper Series No. 29-2024.
Ekerdt, Lorenz K.F. and Kai-Jie Wu, “Self-Selection and the Diminishing Returns of Research,” 2024. Working paper.
Eloundou, Tyna, Sam Manning, Pamela Mishkin, and Daniel Rock, “GPTs are GPTs:
Labor market impact potential of LLMs,” Science, 2024, 384 (6702), 1306–8.
Emberson, Luke and David Owen, “The stock of computing power from NVIDIA chips is
doubling every 10 months,” Technical Report, Epoch 2025.
Erdil, Ege, Tamay Besiroglu Andrei Potlogea, Edu Roldan, Anson Ho, Jaime Sevilla,
Matthew Barnett, Matej Vrzla, and Robert Sandler, “GATE: An Integrated Assessment
Model for AI Automation,” Technical Report, Epoch AI 2025.
Eth, Daniel and Tom Davidson, “Will AI R&D Automation Cause a Software Intelligence
Explosion?,” Technical Report, Forethought 2025.
Gechert, Sebastian, Tomas Havranek, Zuzana Irsova, and Dominika Kolcunová, “Measuring Capital-Labor Substitution: The Importance of Method Choices and Publication Bias,”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 2022, 45, 55–82.
Gosen, Bradley S. Van, Philip L. Verplanck, Robert R. Seal II, Keith R. Long, and Joseph
Gambogi, “Rare-earth elements,” in Klaus J. Schulz, John DeYoung Jr., Robert R. Seal II, and
Dwight Bradley, eds., Critical mineral resources of the United States—Economic and environmental geology and prospects for future supply, United States Geological Survey, 2017.
Habakkuk, H. John, American and British Technology in the Nineteenth Century, Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1962.
Hanson, Robin, “Economic Growth Given Machine Intelligence,” 2001. Working paper.

33
Hémous, David and Morten Olsen, “The Rise of the Machines: Automation, Horizontal
Innovation, and Income Inequality,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2022, 14
(1), 179–223.
Humlum, Anders and Emilie Vestergaard, “Still Waters, Rapid Currents: Early Labor Market Transformation under Generative AI,” 2026. NBER working paper 33777.
Jones, Benjamin F. and Xiaojie Liu, “A Framework for Economic Growth with CapitalEmbodied Technical Change,” American Economic Review, 2024, 114 (5), 1448–87.
Jones, Charles I., “R&D-based Models of Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy,
1995, 103 (4), 759–784.
, “The Past and Future of Economic Growth: A Semi-Endogenous Perspective,” Annual Review of Economics, 2022, 14, 125–52.
, “The A.I. Dilemma: Growth versus Existential Risk,” American Economic Review: Insights,
December 2024, 6 (4), 575–590.
, “How Much Should We Spend to Reduce A.I.’s Existential Risk?,” in Ajay K. Agrawal, Erik
Brynjolfsson, and Anton Korinek, eds., The Economics of Transformative AI, University of
Chicago Press, 2025.
and Christopher Tonetti, “Past Automation and Future A.I.: How Weak Links Tame the
Growth Explosion,” 2026. Working paper.
Kaldor, Nicholas, “A Model of Economic Growth,” The Economic Journal, 1957, 67 (268), 591–
624.
Koetse, Mark J., Henri L.F. de Groot, and Raymond J.G.M. Florax, “Capital-energy Substitution and Shifts in Factor Demand: A Meta-analysis,” Energy Economics, 2008, 30, 2236–
51.
Korinek, Anton, “Economic Policy Challenges for the Age of AI,” in Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Maurice Obstfeld, and Petia Topalova, eds., Rethinking Economic Policy: Steering
Structural Change, MIT Press, 2026, chapter 18. Forthcoming.
and Donghyun Suh, “Scenarios for the Transition to AGI,” 2024. NBER working paper
32255.
and Joseph E Stiglitz, “Artificial Intelligence and Its Implications for Income Distribution
and Unemployment,” in Ajay Agrawal, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, eds., The Economics of
Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019, pp. 349–390.

34
and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Steering Technological Progress,” Conference paper, NBER Economics of AI Conference, 2020.
and Lee Lockwood, “Public Finance in the Age of AI,” in Ajay K. Agrawal, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Anton Korinek, eds., The Economics of Transformative AI, University of Chicago
Press, 2025.
and Megan Juelfs, “Preparing for the (Non-Existent?) Future of Work,” in Justin Bullock
et al., ed., Oxford Handbook of AI Governance, Oxford University Press, 2024.
Kremer, Michael, “Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million BC to 1990,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108 (3), 681–716.
Kundu, Yudhishthira, Manroop Kaur, Tripty Wig, Kriti Kumar, Pushpanjali Kumari,
and Vivek Puri, “A Comparison of the Cerebras Wafer-Scale Integration Technology with
Nvidia GPU-based Systems for Artificial Intelligence,” Technical Report 2025.
Kwa, Thomas, Ben West, Joel Becker, Amy Deng, Katharyn Garcia, Max Hasin, Sami
Jawhar, Megan Kinniment, Nate Rush, Sydney von Arx, Ryan Bloom, Thomas
Broadley, Haoxing Du, Brian Goodrich, Nikola Jurkovic, Luke Harold Miles,
Seraphina Nix, Tao Lin, Neev Parikh, David Rein, Lucas Jun Koba Sato, Hjalmar
Wijk, Daniel M. Ziegler, Elizabeth Barnes, and Lawrence Chan, “Measuring AI Ability to Complete Long Tasks,” arXiv:2503.14499, March 2025.
Lashkari, Danial, “Innovation Policy in Theories of Knowledge Diffusion and Selection,”
2023. Working paper.
Lifland, Eli, Brendan Halstead, Alex Kastner, and Daniel Kokotajlo, “AI Futures Model,”
Technical Report, AI Futures Project 2025.
Metaculus, “When will we have transformative AI?,” 2026. [Link]; Accessed March 30, 2026.
Mookherjee, Dilip and Debraj Ray, “Growth, Automation, and the Long-run Share of Labor,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2022, 46, 1–22.
Narayanan, Arvind and Sayash Kapoor, “AI as Normal Technology,” Technical Report,
Knight First Amendment Institute 2025.
Nordhaus, William D, “Are We Approaching an Economic Singularity? Information Technology and the Future of Economic Growth,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
2021, 13 (1), 299–332.

35
Noy, Shakked and Whitney Zhang, “Experimental Evidence on the Productivity Effects of
Generative Artificial Intelligence,” Science, 2023, 381 (6654).
Otis, Nicholas G., Rowan Clarke, Solene Delecourt, David Holtz, and Rem Koning,
“The Uneven Impact of Generative AI on Entrepreneurial Performance,” 2024. Working
paper.
Our World in Data, “Global primary energy consumption by source,” 2025.
Peng, Sida, Eirini Kalliamvakou, Peter Cihon, and Mert Demirer, “The Impact of AI on
Developer Productivity: Evidence from GitHub Copilot,” 2023. Technical report.
Piketty, Thomas, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2014.
and Gabriel Zucman, “Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich Countries
1700–2010,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1255–310.
Prettner, Klaus, “A Note on the Implications of Automation for Economic Growth and the
Labor Share,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 2019, 23 (3), 1294–1301.
Raina, Rajat, Anand Madhavan, and Andrew Y. Ng, “Large-scale Deep Unsupervised
Learning using Graphics Processors,” in “Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning” ICML ’09 Association for Computing Machinery New York,
NY, USA 2009, pp. 873–80.
Roldán-Monés, Antonio, “When GenAI increases inequality: evidence from a university
debating competition,” 2024. Working paper.
Romer, Paul, “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98 (5),
S71–S102.
Roodman, David, “On the Probability Distribution of Long-term Changes in the Growth Rate
of the Global Economy: An Outside View,” 2020. Open Philanthropy.
Sachs, Jeffrey D and Laurence J Kotlikoff, “Smart Machines and Long-term Misery,” Technical Report 2012. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 18629.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., Seth G. Benzell, and Guillermo LaGarda, “Robots: Curse or Blessing?
A Basic Framework,” 2015. NBER working paper 21091.

36
Sandberg, Anders, “An Overview of Models of Technological Singularity,” in Max More and
Natasha Vita-More, eds., The Transhumanist Reader: Classical and Contemporary Essays on
the Science, Technology, and Philosophy of the Human Future, Wiley Online Library, 2013,
pp. 376–394.
Sasaki, Hiroaki, “Growth with Automation Capital and Declining Population,” Economics
Letters, 2023, 222 (110958).
Shulman, Carl and Elliott Thornley, “How Much Should Governments Pay to Prevent
Catastrophes? Longtermism’s Limited Role,” in Hilary Greaves, Jacob Barrett, and David
Thorstad, eds., Essays on Longtermism: Present Action for the Distant Future, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2025.
Sotala, Kaj, “Advantages of Artificial Intelligences, Uploads, and Digital Minds,” International
Journal of Machine Consciousness, 2012, 4 (1), 275–91.
Trammell, Philip, “The Extreme Inefficiency of Expanding Variety in Endogenous Growth
Theory,” 2025. Working paper.
and Leopold Aschenbrenner, “Existential Risk and Growth,” 2026. Working paper.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics, “The Sustainable Development Goals Extended Report
2024, 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure,” Technical Report 2024.
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Gross Domestic Product,” 2026. Retrieved from FRED,
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, March 30, 2026.
, “Gross Private Domestic Investment: Fixed Investment: Nonresidential: Equipment: Information Processing Equipment (Y034RC1Q027SBEA),” 2026. Retrieved from FRED, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, March 30, 2026.
Uzawa, Hirofumi, “Neutral Inventions and the Stability of Growth Equilibrium,” The Review
of Economic Studies, 1961, 28 (2), 117–124.
van der Werf, Edwin, “Production Functions for Climate Policy Modeling: An Empirical
Analysis,” Energy Economics, 2008, 30, 2964–79.
Villalobos, Pablo, “Scaling Laws Literature Review,” 2023. Epoch AI blog post.
Weitzman, Martin L, “Recombinant Growth,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998, 113
(2), 331–360.

37
World Energy Council, “World Energy Resources: 2013 Survey,” 2013. Chapter 8: Solar
Energy.
Young, Alwyn, “Growth without Scale Effects,” Journal of Political Economy, 1998, 106 (1),
41–63.
Zeira, Joseph, “Workers, Machines, and Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
1998, 113 (4), 1091–1117.
