Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?
Measuring the Human Generalization Function

Keyon Vafa 1 Ashesh Rambachan 2 Sendhil Mullainathan 3

arXiv:2406.01382v1 [cs.CL] 3 Jun 2024

Abstract

models — by prespecifying a task and evaluating on a relevant benchmark — undersells the capabilities of LLMs:
LLMs are capable of performing many tasks, not all of
which can be enumerated. Moreover, many of the tasks
that LLMs will be deployed to perform do not have existing
benchmarks. For example, if a business owner wants to
use an LLM to respond to client emails, which benchmark
dataset should they use to evaluate LLMs? Creating a new
benchmark for each possible task is infeasible.

What makes large language models (LLMs)
impressive is also what makes them hard to
evaluate: their diversity of uses. To evaluate these
models, we must understand the purposes they
will be used for. We consider a setting where
these deployment decisions are made by people,
and in particular, people’s beliefs about where an
LLM will perform well. We model such beliefs
as the consequence of a human generalization
function: having seen what an LLM gets right or
wrong, people generalize to where else it might
succeed. We collect a dataset of 19K examples of
how humans make generalizations across 79 tasks
from the MMLU and BIG-Bench benchmarks.
We show that the human generalization function
can be predicted using NLP methods: people
have consistent structured ways to generalize. We
then evaluate LLM alignment with the human
generalization function. Our results show that —
especially for cases where the cost of mistakes
is high — more capable models (e.g. GPT-4) can
do worse on the instances people choose to use
them for, exactly because they are not aligned
with the human generalization function.

Crucially, in many instances, the decisions about where an
LLM will be deployed are made by people. These decisions
are often driven by where they believe a model will perform
well (Lubars & Tan, 2019; Lai et al., 2022). Assessing the
real-world performance of LLMs therefore requires understanding how people form beliefs about their capabilities.
In this paper, we introduce a framework for quantifying
people’s beliefs about LLM capabilities. In our framework,
these beliefs are determined through interaction and evolve
via a human generalization function: humans ask questions,
observe how an LLM responds, and make inferences about
how it would respond to other questions. This is an act
of human generalization, similar to how humans judge
the expertise of other people based on prior interactions.
For example, people may expect that a model that can
answer college physics questions is capable of answering
elementary math questions, but make no inferences about
its ability to answer questions about Japanese literature.

1. Introduction

We propose an alignment problem based on the human
generalization function: the best LLM is the one that allows
humans to make the most reliable inferences about where
it will succeed. We show that misalignment with the human
generalization function can have harmful consequences for
deployment: a misaligned model that outperforms another
model on all individual questions can be less effective if
a human deploys it to answer questions it is not capable of
answering.

Large language models (LLMs) afford a remarkable diversity of uses. This diversity offers immense promise: the
same model can be used to help software engineers write
code and to summarize a doctor’s notes from a clinical
appointment. However, this same diversity poses an evaluation problem: how should we evaluate a model that seems
capable of doing many things?
Evaluating LLMs in the same way as supervised learning
1

Harvard University 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
University of Chicago Booth. Correspondence to: Keyon Vafa
<kvafa@g.harvard.edu>.

To study the human generalization function empirically, we
collect data about the generalizations people make about
LLM capabilities. Specifically, we show humans how an
LLM responded to one question, and ask them whether it affects their beliefs about how the same model would respond

3

Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

1

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

Classical deployment
Model

Benchmark

Deployment

Deployment based on human generalization

2

1

Task 1

Human
decision maker

LLM
Task 2

Task 1

Task 2

interaction
Task 3

Human
decision maker

Task 3

Task 4

Examples of tasks:
• Sentiment analysis
• Syntactic parsing
• Machine translation

Examples of tasks:
• Writing emails
• Explaining concepts
• Brainstorming ideas

Figure 1: Classically, ML models are deployed to perform tasks based on benchmark performance (left). When deployment
is based on human generalization (right), a human decision maker first interacts with a model to assess its capabilities, and
then the model is deployed to perform tasks the decision maker believes it will perform well on. The model’s deployed
performance depends on how well aligned its capabilities are with the human generalization function.
to another question. We show this function is sparse: most
pairs of questions do not result in people updating their
beliefs. Therefore, we use a bandit approach to target pairs
of questions where humans update their beliefs. In total, we
collect 18,972 examples of human generalizations involving
pairs of questions from 79 distinct LLM evaluation tasks.

and the human generalization function.

2. Framework
Consider a setting in which a large language model (LLM)
is deployed to answer questions from a distribution of questions chosen by a human. We show that traditional evaluation techniques, which assume the distribution of questions
to be fixed, can provide misleading measures of deployed
model performance. Instead, evaluation requires modeling
how humans form deployment distributions. To study this
process, we focus on the case where a human deploys an
LLM to answer questions they believe it can answer correctly. Their beliefs are formed by generalization: humans
assess an LLM’s overall capabilities from a small set of
interactions.

We then pose a new task: how well can the questions that
change human beliefs be predicted? We show that belief
changes can be predicted using NLP methods. BERT outperforms larger and more recent language models, suggesting
that efficacy in predicting human generalization does not
strictly scale with size or complexity. We release all survey
data in hopes that it will foster further research in modeling
the human generalization function.1
Finally, we use our model of human generalizations to evaluate how aligned LLMs are with the human generalization
function. In settings where the cost of mistakes is low, alignment increases with model size. However, in settings where
the cost of mistakes is high, the trend reverses: based on
short interactions, humans reach overconfident conclusions
about the capabilities of the largest models.

Notation. We use Σ∗ to refer to the set of all strings from
an alphabet Σ. We define a set of questions X ⊆ Σ∗ to
be a subset of the set of all strings. We define a model
f : X → Σ∗ to take as input a question and return a string
from the alphabet.2 Additionally, t : X × Σ∗ → {0, 1} is
a function that assesses the quality of a response to a question, where t(x, y) = 1 indicates that y ∈ Σ∗ is a correct
response to question x ∈ X and t(x, y) = 0 indicates an
incorrect response. (The quality of responses could also
be real-valued but we use a binary function without loss of

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2
introduces our framework. Section 3 describes how we
collect data about human generalizations. Section 4 shows
that the human generalization function can be predicted.
Finally, Section 5 evaluates the alignment between LLMs

2

Our framework extends naturally to the case in which a model
is random, returning a probability distribution ∆(Σ∗ ) over strings
in response to any question x ∈ X.

1

https://github.com/keyonvafa/
human-generalization-llms

2

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

In this case, we write f1 (·) ⪰ f2 (·). A model that dominates
another model will have performance at least as good as that
model when evaluated using a fixed deployment distribution
(Equation 1). That is, if f1 (·) ⪰ f2 (·),
P
P
(4)
x p(x)t(x, f1 (x)) ≥
x p(x)t(x, f2 (x)),

generality.)
Evaluation when people choose questions. Evaluating machine learning models involves making assumptions about
how they will be deployed. For classical supervised learning
methods, these assumptions are often straightforward: they
will be deployed to answer the kinds of questions they were
trained to answer. Therefore, models are typically evaluated
against a fixed deployment distribution p(x), where overall
effectiveness is
P

x p(x)t(x, f (x)).

for all fixed deployment distributions p(x). However, when
deployment distributions are dictated by humans, the questions an LLM is chosen to answer can depend on the model
and the relationship may flip:
P
P
(5)
x h(x|f1 )t(x, f1 (x)) <
x h(x|f2 )t(x, f2 (x))

(1)

In Appendix B, we show that human deployment does not
preserve dominance orderings of models. Consider any
pair of “non-trivial” models f1 (·), f2 (·) (i.e., neither model
answers all questions correctly or incorrectly) satisfying
f1 (·) ⪰ f2 (·). There exists some human deployment distribution h(x|f ) under which the human-deployed performance of f2 (·) strictly improves upon that of f1 (·). Evaluating the deployed performance of a model therefore requires
incorporating the human deployment distribution h(x|f ).

For example, a model developed solely to perform sentiment
analysis would be evaluated based on its performance on a
sentiment analysis benchmark.3
General-purpose models like LLMs differ from specificpurpose methods in that there is no fixed set of tasks for
which they will be deployed; the capabilities of LLMs far
exceed the kinds of questions they were trained to answer.
Moreover, many tasks LLMs may be deployed for (e.g.
writing emails) do not have the well-defined benchmark
datasets that are required for classical evaluation.

How people choose questions. So far, we have left the
human deployment distribution h(x|f ) unmodeled. We
next consider one possible mechanism that would give
rise to human deployment distributions: humans choose
deployment questions based on their beliefs about a model’s
ability. For example, a business owner may decide an
LLM is effective at summarizing meeting notes but not at
responding to emails, and delegate responsibilities as such.

Instead, we focus on a setting where humans choose the
questions a model is deployed to answer (Lubars & Tan,
2019; Lai et al., 2022). Humans deploy an LLM to answer
questions according to a human deployment distribution
h(x|f ), a probability distribution over inputs that may depend on the model f (·). The human-deployed performance
of a model is
P
(2)
x h(x|f )t(x, f (x)).

Specifically, let 0 ≤ b(x|f ) ≤ 1 denote a human’s belief
that a model f (·) will respond to input x correctly. We
assume a human chooses a deployment distribution based
on their beliefs about the model’s capabilities: h(x|f ) =
h(b(x|f )) for some transformation h(·). This transformation can take many forms; for example, humans may deploy
a model to answer all questions x where their belief of
success is above some threshold, b(x|f ) > τ .

Human-deployed performance depends on a model in two
ways. The first is direct and well-studied: an LLM that
answers more questions right will have higher values of
t(x, f (x)). But there is a more subtle second effect: the
chosen questions h(x|f ) may depend on the model. If a
human deploys a model to questions it is not capable of
answering, its deployment performance will suffer. This
second effect is omitted when a model is evaluated using a
fixed deployment distribution as in Equation 1.

How do humans form beliefs about the capabilities of large
language models? Beliefs may develop through interaction.
It is infeasible for a human to assess an LLM by asking it
every possible question. Instead, users generalize: given
a model, humans ask questions, observe how the model
responds, and draw conclusions about how the model
would respond to other questions. When a human thinks
a question is directly relevant to another, they may update
their beliefs; for example, they may assume that an LLM
that answers a simple addition question correctly would
also be able to answer a similarly worded one correctly. On
the other hand, if two questions are unrelated, they may not
update their beliefs at all.

That the distribution over deployment questions depends
on the model itself has implications for model comparison.
Consider two models f1 (·), f2 (·). We say f1 (·) dominates
f2 (·) if every question that f2 (·) answers correctly is also
answered correctly by f1 (·):
{x : t(x, f2 (x)) = 1} ⊆ {x : t(x, f1 (x)) = 1}.

(3)

3

Even this standard evaluation rests on the assumption that
deployment will resemble the benchmark dataset. When this is not
the case, such as under distribution shift, standard evaluation could
be a misleading indicator of real-world performance (Koh et al.,
2021).

More formally, for two questions x and x′ , we model this
updating through the human generalization function, b(x |
3

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

x′ , f ), which summarizes a human’s beliefs about an LLM’s
correctness on question x after observing question x′ and
the model’s response f (x′ ). Such a human generalization
function may arise, for example, if humans have some joint
beliefs about the LLM’s correctness on questions x and x′
and update their beliefs according to Bayes rule. Humans
may generalize about the performance of LLMs in many
ways, and so we write the human generalization function to
capture this phenomenon.

sparse: for most pairs of questions, humans do not update
their beliefs for how a model will respond to one question
after seeing how it responded to the other. We describe a bandit approach for finding pairs of questions that lead to belief
changes, and upweight these pairs in our data collection.
Survey design. We construct each example in our survey
as follows: a human is first asked to predict how likely a
large language model is to answer a given question x correctly. They are then shown how an LLM responded to
another question x′ , and are asked to update their initial
prediction. This design elicits a person’s prior belief of correctness b(x|f ), the outcome of their generalization function
b(x|x′ , f ), and the resulting change in beliefs:

Human generalizations dictate the specific questions a
model will be put to answer. The deployed performance
of a model (Equation 2) therefore depends on how aligned
the model is with human generalizations. If, after a few
interactions, a human can assess the questions a model is
equipped to answer, we say that the model is aligned with
the human generalization function and it will thus be deployed to answer questions it is capable of answering. On
the other hand, if it is misaligned, humans may be overconfident or underconfident and deploy an LLM to answer a
suboptimal set of questions. Figure 1 contains an overview
of our framework.

∆(x|x′ , f ) = b(x|x′ , f ) − b(x|f ).

(6)

We refer to the output of the human generalization function
b(x | x′ , f ) as a posterior belief, since it describes the
human’s beliefs after observing the LLM’s response on
another question. Since the survey questions are about
hypothetical LLMs, we do not name specific LLMs when
eliciting prior or posterior beliefs. See Figure 2 for examples
of question pairs in the survey.

As a concrete example, consider two LLMs f1 (·) and f2 (·)
that can both answer every arithmetic question correctly. Assume that f1 (·) cannot answer any other question correctly,
while f2 (·) can also answer questions about multivariable
calculus correctly but not questions about single-variable
calculus. f2 (·) dominates f1 (·), f2 (·) ⪰ f1 (·). If, after interacting with each model, a user correctly determines f1 (·)
is only capable of answering basic arithmetic questions
correctly, they may deploy it only to answer basic arithmetic
questions. If they incorrectly determine that f2 (·) is capable
of answering all math questions correctly, the user may
deploy it to answer all arithmetic, single-variable calculus,
and multi-variable calculus questions. Despite f2 (·)
dominating f1 (·) on every question, its average deployed
error is worse because its capabilities are misaligned with
the human generalization function.

We aim to measure human generalization across a wide variety of questions, while also requiring that questions have
a single correct answer that can be verified automatically.
Therefore, we base data collection on questions from widely
used LLM benchmarks. Our dataset consists of questions
from the 57 tasks in the Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU) benchmark (Hendrycks et al., 2020)
and 22 tasks from the BIG-Bench Hard (BBH) benchmark
(Suzgun et al., 2022), totaling 16,347 individual questions.
The MMLU benchmark consists of factual questions from
both traditional academic subjects such as mathematics and
literature and more practical domains like law and business.
The BBH benchmark includes tasks that are specifically
designed to be challenging for LLMs, testing abilities such
as reasoning and creativity. The diversity of questions in
these datasets ensures that the survey captures a wide range
of perceived capabilities. We include more details about
these datasets and their construction in Appendix A.

The remainder of the paper is dedicated to empirically investigating human generalizations of LLMs. Section 3 describes the collection of a dataset of 19K human generalizations. In Section 4, we analyze this dataset and show that
human beliefs evolve in predictable ways, and propose a new
benchmark: predict how human beliefs will change from
specific interactions. Finally, in Section 5, we assess how
aligned various LLMs are with the human generalizations
we collect.

We conduct all surveys on Prolific (Palan & Schitter, 2018).
To take our surveys, respondents must first pass two comprehension checks to ensure their comprehension of our design.
We collect 15 pairs of predictions from each respondent. We
pay each respondent $2.50, and the median survey completion time is 12 minutes, for an implied rate of $12.50/hour.
We received an IRB review and exemption for this study.

3. Collecting Data on Human Generalizations

Bandit for finding non-sparse examples. We first conducted a pilot survey, where we randomly sampled pairs of
questions from our dataset and asked users for their prior
and posterior beliefs. Based on this pilot, it was clear that
the human generalization function is sparse: for most ran-

We conduct a survey to collect a dataset of 18,972 examples
of human generalizations. In this section, we detail the survey methodology and show that human generalizations are

4

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?
After people see:

Do people change belief on:

After people see:

Do people change belief on:

What type of covalent bonds link
the amino acids in a protein?
(A) Peptide bonds
(B) Hydrogen bonds
(C) Ionic bonds…

Glycogen breakdown in muscle
initially results in the formation of:
(A) glucose
(B) glucose-1-phosphate
(C) glucose-6-phosphate…

Which of the boys on the TV show
'My Three Sons' is adopted?
(A) Mike
(B) Ernie
(C) Chip…

((-6 - 4 * 2 - 6) + (1 + -2 * 1 * 7)) =

answered incorrectly

answered correctly

downward change in belief

no change in belief

After people see:

Do people change belief on:

After people see:

Do people change belief on:

Which of the following articles are
not qualified rights?
(A) Article 3
(B) Article 8
(C) Article 9…

Is there any priority among
international courts and tribunals?
(A) According to the lis pendens
rule, the court or the tribunal
that seizes first the dispute
has exclusive jurisdiction…

On the nightstand, there is a
fuchsia jug, an orange booklet, a
black cat toy, a turquoise crayon,
a yellow paperclip, and a mauve
puzzle. Is the booklet orange?

Which of the following vitamins
provides the coenzyme for
carboxylation reactions?
(A) Biotin
(B) Niacin…

answered correctly

answered incorrectly

upward change in belief

answered correctly

downward change in belief
no change in belief

Figure 2: Qualitative examples about question pairs and predicted belief changes.

4. Modeling Human Generalizations

domly selected pairs of questions, a human’s prior beliefs
are the same as their posterior beliefs (see Figure 3).

Having collected data, we turn to modeling human generalizations: how predictable are human belief changes from
the text of prior interactions? We consider different models
for predicting these changes, which we will use in Section 5
to evaluate LLM alignment with human generalizations.

To focus on question-pairs that lead to meaningful human
generalization, we modify the survey to encourage examples
that will result in belief changes using a bandit approach.
We divide the survey into seven stages. After each stage, we
train BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) to predict the pairs of questions that are likeliest to result in belief changes (more model
details are in Section 4). For the next stage, we upweight
question pairs that are predicted to result in the large beliefs changes based on epsilon-greedy sampling (Kuleshov
& Precup, 2014), sampling the majority of questions from
the top 10th percentile of the model’s predicted likelihood
change and the remaining questions from elsewhere in the
distribution. This is effective at finding question pairs with
non-zero belief changes. Figure 3 shows how the sampling
approach becomes more successful over time. As the survey
progresses, the model’s predictions of the likeliest questions
to result in belief changes improve.

Predicting belief changes. Recall that an individual’s
belief change about how an LLM f (·) will respond to
question x given its response to x′ is given by ∆(x|x′ , f )
(Equation 6). We define a benchmark task to predict
whether an individual’s belief will change: here, the goal
is predicting the binary outcome 1(∆(x|x′ , f ) ̸= 0). We
consider different models denoted by gθ (x|x′ , f (x′ )),
where each model predicts the likelihood of belief change.
We consider the following models:
• Previous correct: A baseline model that doesn’t use
text. It predicts whether a human’s belief about question x will change only from whether an LLM answered question x′ correctly. gθ (x|x′ , f (x′ )) is modeled as a logistic regression.

After seven stages of survey collection, we collected a total
of 18,480 response pairs. We performed one final stage
of data collection to use as a test set, collecting at least
8 responses for each of 492 response pairs to be used for
model evaluation. We aggregated belief changes by taking
the majority response for each pair. For this final stage,
we targeted a 50/50 balance between pairs of questions
that change beliefs and those that do not. We did this by
sampling 2/3 of the dataset from the top 1-percent of the
bandit’s distribution and the remaining 1/3 from the bottom
1-percent. This test dataset consists of 492 response pairs,
43% of which resulted in a belief change.

• Previous correct + same task: Another baseline
model that does not use text. This model adds one
additional feature to the previous baseline: whether x
and x′ are from the same task (of the 79 possible tasks).
The model is trained as a logistic regression.
• Fixed embeddings + XGBoost: This model embeds
each question using fixed sentence embeddings from
VoyageAI. Embeddings for x′ and x are concatenated,
and XGBoost (Chen & Guestrin, 2016) is used to pre5

4000
2000
0

1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00

Fraction non-zero
belief change

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

Distribution of belief changes (posterior - prior)

0.6

Stage 1
Stage 3
Stage 6

0.5
0.4

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Questions ranked by predicted belief change

1.0

Figure 3: Left: The human generalization function is sparse. Most pairs of randomly sampled questions result in no belief
change. Right: The bandit is effective at identifying instances where beliefs change. The x-axis ranks bandit predictions by
likelihood of belief change, while the y-axis shows the fraction actually containing belief changes (using a held-out set).
Over time, the bandit becomes effective at finding non-zero belief changes.
dict belief change on x.

one: as LLMs become larger, some of that information appears to be lost. The models which contain the most structure for predicting generalization are actually some of the
simpler and smaller ones (e.g. BERT), although it is possible
that different prompting strategies could improve the performance of the modern LLMs. For the remainder of the paper,
we use BERT as our model of human generalizations.

• BERT: An ensemble of 5 BERT-base models (Devlin
et al., 2018) are fine-tuned, taking as input the pair of
concatenated inputs x′ and x along with a special token
denoting whether x′ was answered correctly. Predictions are averaged across ensembles.
• Llama-2 7B/13B: Llama-2 models (Touvron et al.,
2023) are fine-tuned to predict belief change on x using
a custom prompt containing x, x′ , and whether x′ was
answered correctly.

Qualitative examples. We examine the human generalization function qualitatively using BERT’s predictions. We
sample 10,000 pairs of questions (x, x′ ), with each question
sampled uniformly at random from all possible questions.
We then generate the model’s predicted belief change for
each pair of question twice: one for the setting where
x′ is answered correctly, and one where x′ is answered
incorrectly. Mirroring a pattern in the training data, humans
are predicted to be more likely to update their beliefs
about an LLM when it answers a question incorrectly; the
mean predicted probability of belief update is 0.46 when
x′ is answered incorrectly, compared to 0.32 when x′ is
answered correctly.

• GPT-3.5 turbo (10-shot, exact inference): We prompt
GPT-3.5 turbo (Brown et al., 2020) using 10 other
examples of generalizations and record the likelihood
the model predicts ‘0’ or ‘1’.
• GPT-4 (10-shot, MC inference): We prompt GPT4 (Achiam et al., 2023) using 10 other examples of
generalizations. Since the GPT-4 API doesn’t provide
predicted probabilities, we sample 5 answers with temperature 1.0 and record the predicted probability as the
Monte Carlo average.

Figure 2 shows examples of question pairs with extreme
predictions. When an LLM answers a chemistry question
incorrectly (top left panel), there is a large predicted probability that a human will update their beliefs about the LLM’s
ability to answer a metabolism question correctly. We see a
similar pattern when the LLM answers a question about human rights correctly (bottom left panel). When there are two
unrelated questions, however, the model predicts a low probability of belief change: for example, correctly answering
a question about a TV sitcom does not affect beliefs about
whether it can answer basic arithmetic (top right panel). Finally, the example in the bottom right panel illustrates that
if a human sees that an LLM answers a basic question about
color correctly, they are unlikely to change their belief about
whether it would answer a complex question about chemistry correctly. If however they see that an LLM answers the
basic question incorrectly, their beliefs on the complex question are likelier to change. Predicted human generalizations
may reflect different assessed difficulties of each question:

Each model is trained on the initial 18,480 response pairs
and evaluated on the test set of 492 aggregated labels.
More details about models and evaluation are provided in
Appendix C.
Table 1 shows the held-out negative-log likelihood (NLL)
and AUC of each model on the 492 test labels. The human
generalization function is predictable: the best model has
an AUC of 0.81, compared to the simplest non-text baseline
with an AUC of 0.60. The models with text perform better
than the baseline models, with BERT being the best model.
This table has two key takeaways. The first is an optimistic
one: existing language models already contain the structure
needed to predict human generalization. This need not have
been the case since it is possible the encoding needed to
perform existing NLP tasks does not contain the information
people use to generalize with. The second is a less optimistic
6

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?
NLL
Previous correct
Same subject + previous correct
Fixed embeddings + XGBoost
BERT (fine-tuned)
Llama-2 (7B) (fine-tuned)
Llama-2 (13B) (fine-tuned)
GPT-3.5 (turbo) (10-shot, exact inference)
GPT-4 (10-shot, MC inference)

AUC

Overall

Prev. correct

Prev. incorrect

Overall

Prev. correct

Prev. incorrect

0.666
0.637
0.629
0.593
0.652
0.624
0.912
0.789

0.638
0.598
0.589
0.545
0.620
0.591
0.911
0.705

0.694
0.675
0.669
0.640
0.690
0.663
1.094
0.873

0.599
0.688
0.682
0.812
0.755
0.787
0.537
0.640

0.500
0.680
0.627
0.855
0.827
0.867
0.528
0.585

0.500
0.556
0.690
0.775
0.668
0.772
0.418
0.566

Table 1: Each model’s performance at predicting human belief change on question x after seeing an LLM’s response to
question x′ . Results are divided into three categories: overall, previous correct (when x′ is answered correctly) and previous
incorrect (when x′ is answered incorrectly). Lower is better for NLL, higher is better for AUC.
Implied deployment threshold

that an LLM answers an easier question correctly has little
bearing on how it will answer a more difficult question, but
if the easier question is answered incorrectly the model is
perceived as unlikely to answer the more difficult question
correctly. We stress that these are qualitative interpretations
that do not hold universally, highlighting the importance of
modeling belief changes as a machine learning task. Appendix D contains more examples.

Alpaca (7B)
Llama-2 (7B)
StripedHyena Nous (7B)
Mistral Instruct (7B)
Llama-2 (13B)
Llama-2 (70B)
GPT-3.5 (turbo)
GPT-4

5. Evaluating LLM Alignment with Human
Generalizations

95%

99%

0.393
0.390
0.386
0.387
0.388
0.384
0.386
0.386

0.392
0.388
0.384
0.384
0.386
0.381
0.382
0.379

The consequences of failing to generalize an incorrect response from an LLM can be far more harmful than failing to
generalize a correct response; for example, an LLM being
deployed to give unsound medical advice can be significantly more harmful than an LLM that is not deployed
when it could have been (Singhal et al., 2023). Weighted
generalized accuracy captures this possible asymmetry as
each choice of α can be mapped to a particular choice of
deployment: a human with these beliefs deploys whenα
ever b(x | x′ , f ) ≥ 1+α
. From this perspective, α = 1
corresponds to a user who will deploy the LLM if the assessed likelihood of correctness is greater than 50%. As
α increases, the user becomes more risk-averse, requiring
higher confidence in the LLM’s correctness to justify its
deployment. In practice, for a chosen value of α, we take
the expectation with respect to question pairs sampled uniformly at random over the set of 16,347 questions from
the MMLU and BBH benchmarks, and we approximate
human posterior beliefs using the BERT model described in
Section 4.

In our framework, after seeing how an LLM responded to
question x′ , a human forms a belief of how likely the model
is to respond correctly to question x: b(x|x′ , f ). The accuracy of the human generalization function can be evaluated
by comparing it to whether the LLM’s response is correct,
t(x, f (x)). We evaluate the weighted generalized accuracy
of the human’s predictions. The weighted accuracy for a
single example is given by
(7)

for y ∈ {0, 1}, 0 ≤ b ≤ 1, and α ≥ 0. By varying the
parameter α ≥ 0, Equation 7 varies the relative weight
placed on incorrect LLM responses. We then aggregate
across question pairs according to
Ex,x′ [ℓα (t(x, f (x)), b(x|x′ , f ))],

90%
0.397
0.396
0.393
0.393
0.395
0.393
0.397
0.408

Table 2: Weighted generalized accuracy (higher is better)
between large language models and human generalizations.
Each deployment threshold corresponds to α/(1 + α).

We now assess the alignment of large language models with
human generalizations. After interacting with an LLM,
a human forms assessments of how likely the LLM is to
answer other questions they did not ask. How well does
model performance align with these expectations?

ℓα (y, b) = yb + α(1 − y)(1 − b),

50%
0.466
0.494
0.495
0.517
0.499
0.512
0.528
0.569

(8)

′

where b(x|x , f ) is an estimate of the human’s posterior belief given by the BERT model of the human generalization
function (see Appendix C for more details). We further normalize Equation 8 by Ex,x′ [t(x, f (x)) + α(1 − t(x, f (x)))]
so that the weighted accuracy takes values between zero
and one.

We assess the alignment between eight different LLMs and
our estimated human generalization function. We approximate the expectation in Equation 8 by taking 500 MonteCarlo samples of question pairs. We pose the same questions
7

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?
Human sees model
answer correctly

Human expects model to
answer correctly

LLM answers correctly

LLM answers incorrectly

Suppose that current disposable
income is $10000 and
consumption spending is $8000.
For every $100 increase in
disposable income saving
increases $10. Given this
information
(A) the marginal propensity to
consume is .80….

((-8 * 1 * -1 + -5) +
(-2 - -3 + 1 * -7)) =

Alice, Bob, and Claire are on the
same team in a soccer match…
Alice is playing fullback, Bob is
playing cheerleader, and Claire is
playing left winger… First, Alice
and Claire trade positions… At the
end of the match, Claire is
playing:

Alice, Bob, and Claire are on the
same team in a soccer match…
Alice is playing right winger, Bob
is playing cheerleader, and Claire
is playing striker… First, Alice
and Claire trade positions… At
the end of the match, Alice is
playing:

According to Hume, morality is
ultimately based on:
(A) reason
(B) God’s commands
(C) social agreements
(D) sympathy

For which of these two scenarios
does the main character do
something clearly morally wrong?
Scenario 1 | I stuck a knife in his
black heart.
Scenario 2 | I took games away
from my son as a punishment for
skipping school.

beliefs that question x would also be answered correctly.
However, for all examples, Llama-2 (70B) responded to
x′ correctly but not x. These examples contain a variety
of human generalization failures: in the first example, an
LLM computes an economic quantity correctly but fails to
answer a basic arithmetic question; in the second example,
an LLM correctly tracks the positions of players on a soccer
team but fails on a very similarly worded problem; in the
last example, an LLM can answer a question about moral
philosophy correctly but cannot apply moral reasoning.

6. Related Work
A large literature focuses on designing AI systems to benefit
human interactions. For example, the field of interactive machine learning (Fails & Olsen Jr, 2003; Amershi et al., 2014;
Holzinger, 2016; Wondimu et al., 2022) explores ways to
integrate human feedback into the learning process of AI
systems, allowing models to learn from humans in real-time.
Most related to our work, Wu et al. (2022) propose a method
for prompting large language models (LLMs) so they are
more controllable by humans wishing to use them while
Lee et al. (2022) introduce benchmarks for measuring the
success of human-LLM interactions. Our work is complementary; we measure the success of interactions with an
LLM not by the specific output of the interaction, but by
how a human makes conclusions about its capabilities.

Figure 4: Examples of human generalization failures due to
misalignment of Llama-2 (70B).

to each model and automatically assess correctness. We use
the Together AI API to query all LLMs except for GPT3.5 and GPT-4, for which we use the OpenAI API. See
Appendix C for more details.

The field of AI-assisted decision-making studies how
AI-provided assistance can improve human decisions
(Green & Chen, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Wang & Yin,
2021; Lai et al., 2021) or increase productivity (Noy &
Zhang, 2023; Dell’Acqua et al., 2023; Perry et al., 2023;
Brynjolfsson et al., 2023). More closely related is the
field of task delegation in machine learning (Lai & Tan,
2019; Mackeprang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021). This
area seeks to understand how humans decide which tasks
should be automated and which should be solved manually.
For example, Lubars & Tan (2019) conduct a survey and
find that humans are more likely to deploy AI systems
in settings where they have strong beliefs in the system’s
capabilities. Our paper complements Lai et al. (2022), who
create interfaces to help humans understand where models
perform well before deciding to deploy them. We focus
on measuring the alignment between LLMs and human
generalizations; future work should study how interventions
such as those by Lai et al. (2022) improve this alignment.

Table 2 shows the alignment between each LLM and human
generalizations for different risk tolerances. When humans
put equal weight on correct and incorrect answers, larger
models are more aligned with the human generalization
function; GPT-4 has the highest accuracy when the implied
deployment questions are those where humans have larger
than 50% confidence. As the relative weight on incorrect
LLM responses increases, GPT-4’s performance under human deployment deteriorates; it has the worst generalized
accuracy for the highest-stakes setting. We find that smaller
models outperform their larger counterparts for high-stakes
settings. These results suggest that larger models can induce
false confidence; although they are capable of answering
more questions in general, humans can reach overoptimistic
conclusions about their capabilities, leading to overdeployment and worse overall performance. In Appendix H we
evaluate the binary cross-entropy of human predictions and
find qualitatively similar results.

A related research field seeks to understand how humans
perceive the inner workings of AI systems (Abdul et al.,
2018; Lim et al., 2009; Rader et al., 2018). The goal of
explainable AI (XAI) is to improve human perceptions of
AI models by providing explanations of a model’s inner
workings (Bansal et al., 2021; Buçinca et al., 2021; Adadi
& Berrada, 2018; Gilpin et al., 2018). A common method

In Figure 4, we show specific examples of LLM misalignment leading to human generalization failures. For each
question pair (x, x′ ), human survey respondents who saw
an LLM respond correctly to question x′ increased their
8

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

is to form instance-level explanations, e.g. in the form of
rationales (Lei et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2018; Yoon et al.,
2018; Bastings et al., 2019; Jain et al., 2020). It would be
interesting to explore how such interventions affect human
generalizations and deployment decisions, as defined by our
framework.

generalizations from multiple questions. Multi-question belief changes may be computed from single-question examples following Bayes rule under certain assumptions; testing
whether this holds from data would be a useful next step.
Finally, the human generalization function may change over
time as people understand the capabilities of LLMs better.
Examples of human generalization should be collected over
time to assess these changes.

Our framework involves evaluating machine learning models against a human deployment distribution, which is an
example of a distribution shift (Miller et al., 2020; Taori
et al., 2020; Koh et al., 2021). It is well understood that the
distribution a model is evaluated against can have a large
effect on performance. We investigate a specific kind of
distribution shift, one that depends on a human’s perception
of the model. Our goal is to measure the beliefs that lead to
this distribution shift.

A complementary direction of research is to find interventions that improve the alignment of LLMs with the human
generalization function. Human generalizations can be
aided by interfaces that help humans understand where
models perform well. Measuring how generalizations
change when humans are assisted by computational
techniques is a promising direction of future research.

Our paper also relates to recent work on LLM alignment
(Gabriel, 2020; Bai et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Wolf
et al., 2023; Ji et al., 2023; Sucholutsky et al., 2023). For
example, one strand of this literature seeks to develop methods to align LLMs with human values: the goal is to ensure
that LLMs act in ways that are consistent with human ethics
and societal norms. Our paper poses a different kind of
alignment. Instead of aligning an LLM to be consistent
with human values, we seek to measure how aligned LLM
capabilities are with human generalizations.

Acknowledgements
We thank the Harvard Data Science Initiative and the Center
for Applied AI at the University of Chicago Booth School
of Business for generous support. We also thank David
Parkes, Juan Carlos Perdomo, Nir Rosenfeld, Ben Scharfstein, Janani Sekar, and Charlotte Siegmann for helpful
comments and feedback.

Impact statement

Finally, this paper contributes to the expanding set of evaluation benchmarks for LLMs and NLP systems generally
(Chang et al., 2023). This paper proposes two types of
benchmarks: an NLP task for modeling the human generalization function from the text of questions, along with a
method to benchmark LLMs based on their alignment with
the human generalization function.

Our paper puts forth a framework for evaluating large language models under human deployment and measuring human generalizations of their capabilities. This framework
can be used to develop large language models that are better aligned with the human generalization function. This
will be beneficial in many settings: an LLM deployed to
give medical advice would no longer be deployed in areas
where it is inaccurate. However, it may be possible for an
adversarial agent to use this framework to deploy an LLM
for nefarious needs. We believe it is imperative to mitigate
such risks in the deployment of all LLM systems.

7. Conclusion
In conclusion, we introduce a framework for evaluating
large language models under human deployment. We link
deployment decisions to people’s beliefs about model capabilities, which is informed by human generalizations. We
collect data about the human generalization function, and
show it is predictable. Our results show that when the cost
of mistakes is high, more capable models can perform worse
on the instances people choose to use them for because they
are not aligned with the human generalization function.

This paper presents a dataset using data collected from human surveys. We received an IRB review and exemption for
this study.

References
Abdul, A., Vermeulen, J., Wang, D., Lim, B. Y., and Kankanhalli, M. Trends and trajectories for explainable, accountable and intelligible systems: An HCI research agenda.
In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–18, 2018.

Our approach has limitations that suggest promising avenues of future research. One limitation of this study is that
we study the human generalization function in the aggregate,
while the true function may differ between humans. Future
research should prioritize collecting more data to allow modeling heterogeneity in the human generalization function.
Additionally, while we only collect data about generalizations involving one question, it is also interesting to consider

Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I.,
Aleman, F. L., Almeida, D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S.,
Anadkat, S., et al. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint
9

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

technological frontier: Field experimental evidence of the
effects of AI on knowledge worker productivity and quality. Harvard Business School Technology & Operations
Mgt. Unit Working Paper, (24-013), 2023.

Adadi, A. and Berrada, M. Peeking inside the black-box: A
survey on explainable artificial intelligence (XAI). IEEE
access, 6:52138–52160, 2018.
Amershi, S., Cakmak, M., Knox, W. B., and Kulesza, T.
Power to the people: The role of humans in interactive
machine learning. AI Magazine, 35(4):105–120, 2014.

Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. BERT:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805,
2018.

Bai, Y., Kadavath, S., Kundu, S., Askell, A., Kernion, J.,
Jones, A., Chen, A., Goldie, A., Mirhoseini, A., McKinnon, C., et al. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI
feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.

Dietterich, T. G. Ensemble methods in machine learning. In
International Workshop on Multiple Classifier Systems,
pp. 1–15. Springer, 2000.
Fails, J. A. and Olsen Jr, D. R. Interactive machine learning.
In Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 39–45,
2003.

Bansal, G., Wu, T., Zhou, J., Fok, R., Nushi, B., Kamar, E.,
Ribeiro, M. T., and Weld, D. Does the whole exceed its
parts? The effect of AI explanations on complementary
team performance. In CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, pp. 1–16, 2021.

Gabriel, I. Artificial intelligence, values, and alignment.
Minds and Machines, 30(3):411–437, 2020.

Bastings, J., Aziz, W., and Titov, I. Interpretable neural
predictions with differentiable binary variables. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.08160, 2019.

Gilpin, L. H., Bau, D., Yuan, B. Z., Bajwa, A., Specter, M.,
and Kagal, L. Explaining explanations: An overview of
interpretability of machine learning. In IEEE Conference
on Data Science and Advanced Analytics, pp. 80–89.
IEEE, 2018.

Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D.,
Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G.,
Askell, A., et al. Language models are few-shot learners.
Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1877–1901,
2020.

Green, B. and Chen, Y. The principles and limits of
algorithm-in-the-loop decision making. Proceedings of
the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 3(CSCW):
1–24, 2019.

Brynjolfsson, E., Li, D., and Raymond, L. R. Generative
AI at work. Working Paper 31161, National Bureau of
Economic Research, April 2023.

Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., Zou, A., Mazeika,
M., Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.

Buçinca, Z., Malaya, M. B., and Gajos, K. Z. To trust or
to think: Cognitive forcing functions can reduce overreliance on AI in AI-assisted decision-making. Proceedings
of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 5(CSCW1):
1–21, 2021.

Holzinger, A. Interactive machine learning for health informatics: When do we need the human-in-the-loop? Brain
Informatics, 3(2):119–131, 2016.

Chang, Y., Wang, X., Wang, J., Wu, Y., Yang, L., Zhu, K.,
Chen, H., Yi, X., Wang, C., Wang, Y., et al. A survey on
evaluation of large language models. ACM Transactions
on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2023.

Jain, S., Wiegreffe, S., Pinter, Y., and Wallace, B. C.
Learning to faithfully rationalize by construction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.00115, 2020.

Chen, J., Song, L., Wainwright, M., and Jordan, M. Learning to explain: An information-theoretic perspective on
model interpretation. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 883–892. PMLR, 2018.

Ji, J., Liu, M., Dai, J., Pan, X., Zhang, C., Bian, C., Sun, R.,
Wang, Y., and Yang, Y. Beavertails: Towards improved
safety alignment of LLM via a human-preference dataset.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04657, 2023.

Chen, T. and Guestrin, C. XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system. In ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 785–794,
2016.

Jiang, A. Q., Sablayrolles, A., Mensch, A., Bamford, C.,
Chaplot, D. S., Casas, D. d. l., Bressand, F., Lengyel, G.,
Lample, G., Saulnier, L., et al. Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.

Dell’Acqua, F., McFowland, E., Mollick, E. R., LifshitzAssaf, H., Kellogg, K., Rajendran, S., Krayer, L., Candelon, F., and Lakhani, K. R. Navigating the jagged

Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
10

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

Koh, P. W., Sagawa, S., Marklund, H., Xie, S. M., Zhang,
M., Balsubramani, A., Hu, W., Yasunaga, M., Phillips,
R. L., Gao, I., et al. WILDS: A benchmark of in-thewild distribution shifts. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 5637–5664. PMLR, 2021.

Palan, S. and Schitter, C. Prolific.ac—A subject pool for
online experiments. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance, 17:22–27, 2018.

Kuleshov, V. and Precup, D. Algorithms for multi-armed
bandit problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1402.6028, 2014.

Perry, N., Srivastava, M., Kumar, D., and Boneh, D. Do
users write more insecure code with AI assistants? In
ACM CCS Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, 2023.

Lai, V. and Tan, C. On human predictions with explanations and predictions of machine learning models: A case
study on deception detection. In Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 29–38, 2019.

Poli, M., Massaroli, S., Nguyen, E., Fu, D. Y., Dao, T.,
Baccus, S., Bengio, Y., Ermon, S., and Ré, C. Hyena
hierarchy: Towards larger convolutional language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.10866, 2023.
Rader, E., Cotter, K., and Cho, J. Explanations as mechanisms for supporting algorithmic transparency. In CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp.
1–13, 2018.

Lai, V., Chen, C., Liao, Q. V., Smith-Renner, A., and
Tan, C. Towards a science of human-AI decision making: A survey of empirical studies. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.11471, 2021.

Singhal, K., Azizi, S., Tu, T., Mahdavi, S. S., Wei, J., Chung,
H. W., Scales, N., Tanwani, A., Cole-Lewis, H., Pfohl, S.,
et al. Large language models encode clinical knowledge.
Nature, 620(7972):172–180, 2023.

Lai, V., Carton, S., Bhatnagar, R., Liao, Q. V., Zhang, Y.,
and Tan, C. Human-AI collaboration via conditional
delegation: A case study of content moderation. In CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp.
1–18, 2022.

Sucholutsky, I., Muttenthaler, L., Weller, A., Peng, A., Bobu,
A., Kim, B., Love, B. C., Grant, E., Achterberg, J., Tenenbaum, J. B., et al. Getting aligned on representational
alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13018, 2023.

Lee, M., Srivastava, M., Hardy, A., Thickstun, J., Durmus,
E., Paranjape, A., Gerard-Ursin, I., Li, X. L., Ladhak,
F., Rong, F., et al. Evaluating human-language model
interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09746, 2022.

Suzgun, M., Scales, N., Schärli, N., Gehrmann, S., Tay, Y.,
Chung, H. W., Chowdhery, A., Le, Q. V., Chi, E. H.,
Zhou, D., et al. Challenging BIG-bench tasks and
whether chain-of-thought can solve them. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.09261, 2022.

Lei, T., Barzilay, R., and Jaakkola, T. Rationalizing neural
predictions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04155, 2016.
Lim, B. Y., Dey, A. K., and Avrahami, D. Why and why
not explanations improve the intelligibility of contextaware intelligent systems. In CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 2119–2128, 2009.

Taori, R., Dave, A., Shankar, V., Carlini, N., Recht, B., and
Schmidt, L. Measuring robustness to natural distribution shifts in image classification. Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33:18583–18599, 2020.

Lubars, B. and Tan, C. Ask not what AI can do, but what
AI should do: Towards a framework of task delegability.
Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Taori, R., Gulrajani, I., Zhang, T., Dubois, Y., Li, X.,
Guestrin, C., Liang, P., and Hashimoto, T. B. Alpaca: A
strong, replicable instruction-following model. Stanford
Center for Research on Foundation Models, 3(6):7, 2023.

Mackeprang, M., Müller-Birn, C., and Stauss, M. T. Discovering the sweet spot of human-computer configurations:
A case study in information extraction. Proceedings of
the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 3(CSCW):
1–30, 2019.

Touvron, H., Martin, L., Stone, K., Albert, P., Almahairi,
A., Babaei, Y., Bashlykov, N., Batra, S., Bhargava, P.,
Bhosale, S., et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and finetuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288,
2023.

Miller, J., Krauth, K., Recht, B., and Schmidt, L. The effect
of natural distribution shift on question answering models.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
6905–6916. PMLR, 2020.

Wang, D., Liao, Q. V., Zhang, Y., Khurana, U., Samulowitz,
H., Park, S., Muller, M., and Amini, L. How much
automation does a data scientist want? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.03970, 2021.

Noy, S. and Zhang, W. Experimental evidence on the productivity effects of generative artificial intelligence. Science,
381(6654):187–192, 2023.

Wang, X. and Yin, M. Are explanations helpful? A comparative study of the effects of explanations in AI-assisted
11

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

decision-making. In International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 318–328, 2021.
Wang, Y., Zhong, W., Li, L., Mi, F., Zeng, X., Huang,
W., Shang, L., Jiang, X., and Liu, Q. Aligning large
language models with human: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.12966, 2023.
Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V., Chaumond, J., Delangue, C.,
Moi, A., Cistac, P., Rault, T., Louf, R., Funtowicz, M.,
et al. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural
language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771,
2019.
Wolf, Y., Wies, N., Levine, Y., and Shashua, A. Fundamental limitations of alignment in large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11082, 2023.
Wondimu, N. A., Buche, C., and Visser, U. Interactive
machine learning: A state of the art review. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.06196, 2022.
Wu, T., Terry, M., and Cai, C. J. AI chains: Transparent
and controllable human-AI interaction by chaining large
language model prompts. In CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–22, 2022.
Yoon, J., Jordon, J., and van der Schaar, M. INVASE:
Instance-wise variable selection using neural networks.
In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2018.
Zhang, Y., Liao, Q. V., and Bellamy, R. K. Effect of confidence and explanation on accuracy and trust calibration in
AI-assisted decision making. In Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 295–305, 2020.

12

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?
1400
1400

5000
1200

1200

800

800

3000

600

600

2000

400

400

200

200

0

4000

1000

1000

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Prior beliefs

0.8

0

1.0

1000

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Posterior beliefs

0.8

1.0

0

1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00

Belief changes (posterior - prior)

Figure 5: The distribution of prior beliefs, posterior beliefs, and the changes in beliefs for survey respondents after the first
stage of survey collection.

A. Dataset construction
As described in Section 3, we base our survey on a dataset of questions used to evaluate LLMs. Our dataset consists of
questions from the Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU) benchmark (Hendrycks et al., 2020) and the
BIG-Bench Hard (BBH) benchmark (Suzgun et al., 2022). The MMLU benchmark consists of factual questions from both
traditional academic subjects such as mathematics and literature and more practical domains like law and business. The
BBH benchmark includes tasks that are specifically designed to be challenging for LLMs, testing abilities such as reasoning
and creativity.
We include all 57 tasks from MMLU. Since our goal is to measure human generalization of LLM capabilities, we did
not include 6 tasks from BBH that we determined were difficult for humans to understand: Boolean expressions, Dyck
languages, salient translation error detection, word sorting, geometric shapes, and DROP. We also did not include questions
that were longer than 750 characters. In total, we were left with 16,347 individual questions.
We conducted all surveys using the Prolific platform (Palan & Schitter, 2018). We limited test-takers to English-language
speakers. Each survey consisted of 15 pairs of generalization questions. Respondents were paid $2.50, and the median
survey duration was 12 minutes, totaling a rate of $12.50/hour. We did not allow the same user to take a survey multiple
times.
Figure 5 contains the distribution of prior beliefs, posterior beliefs, and changes in beliefs for survey respondents after the
first stage of survey collection (8805 total responses). This figure indicates the sparsity of human generalizations: for most
randomly sampled pairs of questions, seeing how an LLM responded to one has no bearing a user’s perception of how it
would respond to the other.

B. Evaluation against human deployment distributions doesn’t preserve dominance
Evaluating models against human deployment distributions does not preserve dominance relations between models. Consider
two models f1 (·), f2 (·). Recall that f1 (·) dominates f2 (·) (denoted by f1 (·) ⪰ f2 (·)) if every question that f2 (·) answers
correctly is also answered correctly by f1 (·):
{x : t(x, f2 (x)) = 1} ⊆ {x : t(x, f1 (x)) = 1}.
Assume f1 (·) ⪰ f2 (·). First, note that evaluating models against a fixed deployment distribution (Equation 1) preserves
dominance orderings: for all fixed deployment distributions p(x),
X
X
p(x)t(x, f1 (x)) ≥
p(x)t(x, f2 (x)).
x

x

13

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

We now consider the case where models are evaluated against human deployment distributions h(x|f ). We allow the human
deployment distribution h(x|f ) to arbitrarily depend on the model f (·). Now further assume f1 (·), f2 (·) are non-trivial,
meaning that there is at least one input z where f1 is incorrect and at least one input z ′ where f2 is correct (z ̸= z ′ since
f1 (·) ⪰ f2 (·)):
∃z : t(z, f1 (z)) = 0
∃z ′ : t(z ′ , f2 (z ′ )) = 1.
Since the human deployment distribution can depend arbitrarily on the model f (·), we can adversarially construct human
deployment distributions as follows:
(
1, if x = z
h(x|f1 ) =
0, otherwise
(
1, if x = z ′
h(x|f2 ) =
0, otherwise
By construction,
0=

X

h(x|f1 )t(x, f1 (x)) <

x

X

h(x|f2 )t(x, f2 (x)) = 1.

(9)

x

This highlights the importance of the human deployment distribution. Even if a model is better overall (i.e., dominates
another model), it can still induce a human to deploy it to inputs it is not capable of answering correctly.

C. Experimental details
We begin by describing the models used to predict belief change from Section 4.
For BERT, we use the BERT-base-uncased model provided by Hugging Face (Wolf et al., 2019). BERT’s tokenizer includes
a special token to indicate two separate inputs. We use this token to separate the two inputs: the previous question that was
answered either correctly or incorrectly, and the new question. We use a separate special token to indicate whether the first
question was answered correctly or incorrectly. We fine-tune BERT using a batch size of 32 for 2 epochs, optimizing using
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) and a learning rate of 5e-5. We ensemble predictions over 5 random training seeds (Dietterich,
2000).
For the Llama models, we fine-tune Llama-2 (7B) and Llama-2 (13B) using full-parameter fine-tuning on Together AI. We
use a custom prompt that includes all textual information. Here is one example:
<s>[INST] <<SYS>>
You are predicting how people’s perceptions of large language models would
change as they see more information.
You will see a question posed to a large language model, and whether the
large language model responded to that question correctly or incorrectly.
You will then see a second question, and be asked to predict whether one’s
confidence in the large language model’s ability to answer this second
question changes after seeing how it responded to the first one.
The final prediction will be 0 (for no change) or 1 (for change).
Many questions will be unrelated (and thus result in 0).
<</SYS>>
The large language model was asked the following question:
<q1>
14

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

Is the following sentence plausible? "Aleksander Barkov passed the
puck."
</q1>
It answered this question correctly.
The large language model was then asked the following question:
<q2>
A special feature of adaptive immunity is:
(A) Speed of response to a foreign protein
(B) Ability to distinguish self and non self
(C) Ability to distinguish viruses and bacteria
(D) Short memory
</q2>
Should you change your confidence in the large language model’s ability
to answer Question 2 after seeing it answered Question 1 incorrectly?
[/INST] </s>
This prompt was followed by a 0 when a survey respondent didn’t report a belief change, and 1 otherwise. We trained each
model for 3 epochs, using a batch size of 4 and learning rate of 1e-5. Since each model was trained to predict a 0 or 1, we
evaluated each model using exact inference.
For GPT-3.5 (turbo), we evaluate in a few-shot setting. We chained together 10 prompts of examples similar to the above,
followed by the prompt for the question under consideration. Similarly to the Llama models, we were able to perform exact
inference since the model predictions were binary.
Finally, for GPT-4, we proceeded analogously as with GPT-3.5 but with the exception that GPT-4 does not provide users
with log-probabilities of predictions. Instead, we evaluated predictions using Monte-Carlo sampling. We sampled from
GPT-4 five times using a temperature of 1 and averaged its predictions to form a single prediction.
We also model human posterior beliefs using our model of predicted belief change for the experiments in Section 5. We
model posterior beliefs as following a mixture model: when the predicted belief change is 0, the posterior belief is equal to
the prior belief. Otherwise, posterior beliefs are scaled by predicted belief change. We scale posterior beliefs according to
empirical averages, corresponding to average posterior beliefs for all questions responded to correctly and incorrectly.
For the experiments in Section 5, we evaluate the alignment of eight different LLMs with our model of human generalizations.
For each question, we prompt a model in a zero-shot setting. We automatically evaluate the model’s correctness. We
consider the following models: Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023), StripedHyena Nous (Poli et al., 2023), Llama-2 (7B, 13B, and
70B) (Touvron et al., 2023), Mistral Instruct v0.2 (7B) (Jiang et al., 2023), GPT-3.5 turbo (Brown et al., 2020), and GPT-4
(Achiam et al., 2023). We use the OpenAI API to query GPT-3.5 turbo and GPT-4. For all other models, we use the Together
AI API.

D. Qualitative examples
Here we include additional qualitative examples of predictions from our model trained on human generalizations. Figure 6
contains examples of the pairs of questions that induce the largest predicted human belief change, both for when the initial
question is answered correctly and incorrectly.

15

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

After people see:

Do people change belief on:

After people see:

Do people change belief on:

For which of these two scenarios
does the main character do
something clearly morally wrong?
Scenario 1 | I bought a bowl
from the marketplace.
Scenario 2 | I refused to shake
hands because I didn't want the
virus to infect me.

For which of these two scenarios
does the main character do
something clearly morally wrong?
Scenario 1 | I copied answers
from a book during an open
book test at school.
Scenario 2 | When my friend
told me in private she had a
crush, I told everyone at school.

Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve
are holding a white elephant gift
exchange… Alice has a brown
present, Bob has a white present,
Claire has a black ball, Dave has
a red present, and Eve has a
purple present… First, Bob and
Claire swap their gifts… At the
end of the event, Bob has the:

Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve
are playing a game… Alice has a
orange ball, Bob has a black ball,
Claire has a red ball, Dave has a
pink ball, and Eve has a blue
ball… First, Eve and Bob swap
balls… At the end of the game,
Bob has the:

answered correctly

answered incorrectly

upward change in belief

downward change in belief

After people see:

Do people change belief on:

After people see:

Do people change belief on:

For which of these two scenarios
does the main character do
something clearly morally wrong?
Scenario 1 | I answered the
phone and hung up as soon as I
heard my mom start talking.
Scenario 2 | I stole the show at
the talent show.

For which of these two scenarios
does the main character do
something clearly morally wrong?
Scenario 1 | I did not stop to
help the stranded swimmer.
Scenario 2 | I took clothes that
weren't mine at the selflaundromat.

Alice, Bob, and Claire are holding
a white elephant gift exchange…
Alice has a red present, Bob has
a blue present, and Claire has a
yellow present… First, Alice and
Claire swap their gifts… At the
end of the event, Claire has the:

Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve
are playing a game… Alice has a
red ball, Bob has a blue ball,
Claire has a brown ball, Dave has
a black ball, and Eve has a
orange ball… First, Dave and
Claire swap balls… At the end of
the game, Claire has the:

answered correctly

answered incorrectly

upward change in belief

downward change in belief

After people see:

Do people change belief on:

After people see:

Do people change belief on:

For which of these two scenarios
does the main character do
something clearly morally wrong?
Scenario 1 | I took my best
friend's wife on a romantic
cruise to the Bahamas.
Scenario 2 | I bound her arms
and legs and lashed her with a
whip.

For which of these two scenarios
does the main character do
something clearly morally wrong?
Scenario 1 | I planted
cucumbers in my neighbor's
garden.
Scenario 2 | When I stayed over
at my friends' house, I used their
bathroom, brushed my teeth,
and spat in their sink.

Alice, Bob, Claire, Dave, and Eve
are holding a white elephant gift
exchange… Alice has a green
present, Bob has a purple
present, Claire has a blue
present, Dave has a black ball,
and Eve has a red present…
First, Dave and Claire swap their
gifts… At the end of the event,
Eve has the:

Alice, Bob, and Claire are holding
a white elephant gift exchange…
Alice has a red present, Bob has
a blue present, and Claire has a
yellow present… First, Alice and
Claire swap their gifts… At the
end of the event, Claire has the:

answered correctly

answered incorrectly

upward change in belief

downward change in belief

Figure 6: The question pairs with the highest predicted likelihood of belief change. On the left are examples where the
initial question is answered correctly, and on the right are examples where the initial question is answered incorrectly. These
are the examples with the highest predictions among 10,000 question pairs sampled uniformly at random.

16

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

E. Examples of human explanations for changes
In some of our surveys, we ask humans to provide explanations for their belief changes (or lack thereof). Below we include
a few examples:
“Both questions can be answered through searching online so I assume the model cannot do this well.”
“This question is just math, it should know”
“The LLM had a problem with an easy question”
“The second question makes me think [it] has a database of regular and already answered questions. [So] the
answer would be [straightforward]”
“The question is easy for LLM to evaluate”
“Seems like the LLM doesn’t get confused easily”
These examples highlight the structured manner in which humans make generalizations about the capabilities and limitations
of language models (LLMs).

F. Generalization of human responses
In Section 5, we assessed the alignment of LLMs and human generalizations. It is natural to ask: how well are human
generalizations aligned with the capabilities of other humans?
This is in general a difficult question to answer that would require ample data collection from many humans across tasks.
Rather than attempt to answer this question generally, we study the question on a small scale using questions from two
benchmark tasks: high school chemistry questions from MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020) and logical deduction questions
(with 3 objects) from BIG-Bench Hard (Suzgun et al., 2022). To collect the human generalization function, we perform the
survey described in the main text with two modifications: first, we limit data to these two tasks, and second, we inform
survey respondents that the examples they see will come from either AI systems or humans but we do not tell them which is
which (for the main survey we explicitly mention that answers come from an LLM).
We then assess how well posterior beliefs about question answering capabilities align with true performance for both humans
and LLMs. In other words: when humans see a human response to one question, how accurate are they at predicting whether
they’ll respond to another question correctly? And the analogous question for generalizing LLMs: when humans see an
LLM’s response to one question, how accurate are they at predicting whether it will respond to another question correctly?
Answering these questions involves collecting human and LLM responses to benchmark questions. For human responses,
we conduct another Prolific survey to collect 300 responses from 15 different survey takers. To collect LLM responses, we
query them as before. We then evaluate posterior calibration by dividing posterior belief into three regions: confident in
incorrect response (0-30% belief in correctness), uncertain (30-70% belief in correctness), and confident in correct response
(70-100% belief in correctness). We then calculate the average accuracy for each region. For example, the average accuracy
for the “uncertain” region is given by
Ex,x′ [t(x, f (x)) | 0.30 < b(x|x′ , f ) < 0.70],

(10)

where f refers to either an LLM or a human. When f refers to a human, we use the same human’s response for x and x′ ,
but average accuracy over all humans.
Because the domain of questions is narrow for this exercise, we can use the empirical human generalization function instead
of approximating it with an ML model. We use 585 samples of question pairs to evaluate posterior calibration.
Figure 7 shows the calibration of the human generalization function when generalizing humans versus LLMs. Humans are
most calibrated when assessing other humans. When a human predicts that an answer will be inaccurate, the actual answer
17

Accuracy

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Generalizing responses from:
Human
Llama-2 (7B)
Llama-2 (13B)
Llama-2 (70B)

Confident answer
will be inaccurate

Uncertain

Posterior Belief

Confident answer
will be accurate

Figure 7: Comparing human generalization of LLMs to human generalization of humans. This experiment consists of
questions from two benchmark tasks: high school chemistry questions from MMLU and logical deduction questions from
BIG-Bench Hard. Standard errors are shaded in.
is inaccurate more often for humans than for LLMs. On the flip side, when a human predicts that an answer will be accurate,
the actual answer is accurate more often for humans than for LLMs. As humans become more confident, their assessments
of human responses improve. However, for LLMs, the relationship between confidence of human generalization and LLM
performance is less clear.
These results suggest that human generalizations are more aligned with human capabilities than LLM capabilities for this
set of questions, LLMs, and survey-takers. Future work should prioritize studying this question more broadly, across more
tasks and humans.

G. Survey example
Figure 8 shows an example screen from the our survey for eliciting beliefs from a respondent.

Figure 8: Example screen about collecting human beliefs from the survey.
18

Do Large Language Models Perform the Way People Expect?

H. Additional analyses
To further analyze the BERT model’s performance at predicting belief changes, we investigate the source tasks for which it
is performing well and poorly. Table 3 shows AUC broken down in two ways: first by the task people generalize from (i.e.
the task for question x′ ) and second by the task people generalize to (i.e. the task for question x). Table 4 shows a similar
analysis for task pairs. (For both tables, we exclude tasks/pairs of tasks that have less than five examples in the test set.) We
see that the model’s strengths and weaknesses are varied across tasks and sources (e.g. BIG-Bench Hard versus MMLU).
Grouped by task people generalize from

Grouped by task people generalize to

Task

AUC

Task

AUC

Logical deduction [seven objects] (BBH)
Miscellaneous (MMLU)
High school psychology (MMLU)
College medicine (MMLU)
...
College chemistry (MMLU)
Conceptual physics (MMLU)
Web of lies (BBH)
Penguins in a table (BBH)

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
...
0.50
0.50
0.48
0.08

Ruin names (BBH )
High school psychology (MMLU)
Logical deduction [three obejcts] (BBH)
Astronomy (MMLU)
...
Moral scenarios (MMLU)
College biology (MMLU)
Movie recommendation (BBH)
Sports understanding (BBH)

1.00
1.00
0.91
0.89
...
0.50
0.48
0.44
0.20

Table 3: AUC broken down by the task people generalize from (e.g. x′ ) and the task people generalize to (e.g. x). Questions
from the Massive Multitask Language Understanding dataset are denoted by MMLU and questions from the BIG-Bench
Hard dataset are denoted by BBH.
Grouped by task pairs
Task people generalize from

Task people generalize to

AUC

Tracking five shuffled objects (BBH)
Clinical knowledge (MMLU)
Tracking five shuffled objects (BBH)
Logical deduction [five objects] (BBH)
High school biology (MMLU)
High school biology (MMLU)

Logical deduction [three objects] (BBH)
Clinical knowledge (MMLU)
Tracking five shuffled objects (BBH)
Logical deduction [five objects] (BBH)
College biology (MMLU)
Clinical knowledge (MMLU)

1.00
1.00
0.83
0.69
0.67
0.67

Table 4: AUC broken down by the pair of generalization tasks (x, x′ ). Questions from the Massive Multitask Language
Understanding dataset are denoted by MMLU and questions from the BIG-Bench Hard dataset are denoted by BBH.

Implied deployment threshold
Alpaca (7B)
Llama-2 (7B)
StripedHyena Nous (7B)
Mistral Instruct (7B)
Llama-2 (13B)
Llama-2 (70B)
GPT-3.5 (turbo)
GPT-4

50%

95%

98%

99%

0.788
0.733
0.733
0.689
0.725
0.701
0.668
0.588

0.929
0.933
0.942
0.935
0.937
0.945
0.935
0.917

0.936
0.945
0.956
0.954
0.951
0.963
0.958
0.962

0.938
0.950
0.960
0.960
0.956
0.969
0.965
0.977

Table 5: Weighted binary cross-entropy (lower is better) between large language models and human generalizations. Each
deployment threshold corresponds to α/(1 + α).
Table 5 replicates the alignment analysis from Section 5 using weighted binary cross-entropy instead of weighted accuracy.
The results are qualitatively similar to those in Table 2.

19
